=== Ayurvedic-Science-of-Food-and-Nutrition-PDFDrive.com-.pdf ===
Sanjeev Rastogi    Editor  
Ayurvedic 
Science of 
Food and 
Nutrition
  Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition 
     
       Sanjeev   Rastogi     
 Editor 
 Ayurvedic Science 
of Food and Nutrition                       
 ISBN 978-1-4614-9627-4      ISBN 978-1-4614-9628-1 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1 
 Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2013956136 
 © Springer Science+Business Media New York   2014 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, speciﬁ  cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁ  lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection 
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁ  cally for the purpose of being entered and 
executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this 
publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s 
location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. 
Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations 
are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁ  c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for 
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with 
respect to the material contained herein. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media ( www.springer.com )   Editor 
   Sanjeev   Rastogi   
  PG Department of Kaya Chikitsa 
 State Ayurvedic College 
  Lucknow ,  India   
v   Foreword     
 For centuries Ayurveda has emphasized the role of food in health and disease. 
Modern medicine started out by basing all its treatments on drug-based principles and focused on speciﬁ  c problems rather than on individuals and the food they ate. 
This book satisﬁ  es a long-felt need of many physicians and nutritionists who were 
aware of the immense knowledge that existed but never knew how to access that information. The book covers almost every aspect of Ayurveda, from basic princi-ples to therapeutic diets, and compares the principles of modern medicine and Ayurveda, which will demonstrate for the reader the rationale behind the informa-tion found in traditional treatises. 
 Part I deals with the fundamental Ayurvedic principles of food and nutrition. 
That food, or Ahara, drugs, or Aushadi, and Lifestyle, or Vihara, are important for well being was understood several centuries ago, and all three were considered essential for treatment; these are now being rediscovered by modern medicine. The book does not theorize but explains how this knowledge can be translated into day-to- day practice. One chapter deals with bioactive molecules, which is a very recent research issue. Food as an adjuvant in several disease states, including dia-betes, hypertension, and cancer, as well as in convalescence, is described in detail with examples. 
 The role of stress and its role in food behavior is an aspect of pathophysiology 
   that is extremely relevant to modern diseases like obesity and lifestyle disorders. One chapter in the book describes the science behind fasting and its beneﬁ  ts to 
health. Modern food practices and western dietary habits are reviewed and linked to the knowledge available in Ayurveda so that the younger generation can understand the scientiﬁ  c reasoning behind the disapproval of some of these habits and methods. 
The authors have also analyzed the nature of food, its texture, taste, and satiety, and its role in digestion and good health. The chapter on Ayurvedic nutrition and dietet-ics will be useful to students, teachers, and practitioners of dietetics. All of the 
vi
book’s contributors are eminent scientists and teachers. One of the authors, who 
reviews the Western diet in the context of Ayurveda, is from the West. 
 This book contains invaluable information that will be useful to almost anyone in 
the ﬁ eld or with an interest in nutrition. I would welcome the appearance of more 
books like it covering various aspects of human health with a blend of modern and traditional practices. Springer is to be commended for committing to this book’s publication.  
        Oklahoma City ,    OK ,  USA        Dr. B.     Sesikeran       Foreword
vii  Pref ace     
 Despite the consistent stress throughout the Ayurvedic classics that is placed on 
Ahara as a fundamental principle related to health and the elimination of disease, it is a painful revelation that we ﬁ  nd it nowhere in contemporary Ayurvedic practice. 
Of the three basic components of the package offered for comprehensive health care in Ayurveda, Aushadhi came to overshadow the two other equally important com-ponents: Ahara and Vihara. The other two components gradually faded as elements of health care following the quick, tangible, and manageable effects on health offered by drugs. Only later, with the sudden    and phenomenal upsurge of metabolic and degenerative diseases that have become the hallmarks of modern society, was it realized what was missing. Ayurveda stresses Aushadi, Ahara, and Vihara as the three pillars of a healthy and meaningful life. Throughout the period of the modern scientiﬁ  c renaissance, we have been trying to walk on one leg while ignoring the 
other two supports provided by the other leg, which we have had all along. The results are obvious; it has led to imbalances in our health and to disease. 
 Although it is now universally accepted that food plays a pivotal role in building 
and maintaining health and that Vihara, or lifestyle, signiﬁ  cantly affects our overall 
health, it is still difﬁ  cult to bring these two together in as accessible a format as 
drugs. Ultimately, the application of Ahara and Vihara to maintain and sustain health requires more than the mere application of a few set formulas aimed at curing or preventing a few disease conditions. This will possibly require a retuning of our minds to look inwardly at the preventive aspects of these interventions rather than looking into the immediate curative effects they might offer. 
 But promoting Ahara as a reliable approach to caring for one’s health has not 
been easy. Ayurvedic fundamentals regarding diet and nutrition are too elaborate to be conﬁ  ned in to a small deliverable package of health care for all seasons   . These 
principles must be applied with the highest precision on an individual basis to yield optimum results. Thus, Ayurvedic principles of food and nutrition can be subdi-vided on the basis of their generalizability and on the basis of their speciﬁ  city for 
individuals based on a number of variables like  prakriti   (constitution),  agni  (meta-
bolic status),  kala  (age/time/season),  desha   (geographical speciﬁ  city),  satmya   
(compatibility), and many more. 
viii
 It would be desirable to test all Ayurvedic fundamentals on the basis of their 
variability and applicability in different population sets to attain the desired results. This would certainly require    a thorough reconsideration of Ayurveda’s claims regarding diet and nutrition and a reconsideration of conventional scientiﬁ  c 
approaches to verify the testability of traditional wisdom. If the traditional wisdom cannot be tested, it may be necessary to redesign many of the tools of conventional research to reveal what is not made evident by them. As a modest beginning, we can revisit all available scientiﬁ  c knowledge regarding Ayurvedic principles of food and 
nutrition. This would involve an exhaustive exploration    of avenues perhaps not directly connected to Ayurveda, but a careful enquiry might uncover a fascinating applicability to what is taught in Ayurveda. The scientiﬁ  c exploration of the existing 
body of knowledge with reference to Ayurvedic principles of food and nutrition constitutes the theme of this book. This is certainly just the beginning. We still have a long way to go before we truly understand how to remain healthy with the help of the strongest medicine ever evolved – food.  
        Lucknow ,  India       Sanjeev     Rastogi      Preface
ix  Acknowledgments  
 The present book is an offshoot of our previous work in an attempt to ﬁ  nd evidence- 
based applications of Ayurvedic principles to health care. It was a great revelation over the course of research to discover that, despite its profound importance in Ayurvedic health principles , food is often neglected in the contemporary practice of Ayurveda. Together with the universal desire    to ﬁ  nd better health care solutions 
through the application of food in daily life, there was a need to determine the logic of Ayurvedic food principles in light of science and then ﬁ  nd a way to relate this 
knowledge to a modern understanding of nutrition so as to formulate a food-based solution to health that was based on both a holistic understanding of health and a scientiﬁ  c commitment to knowledge. This book is the outcome of this prolonged 
thought process that spanned several years. Professor Diana Lurie from the University of Montana and Professor Francesco Chiappelli from the University of California at Los Angeles were instrumental in my decision to pursue this work. That decision was reinforced by Professor R.H. Singh from Banaras Hindu University, who was my mentor and inspiration in my journey to understanding Ayurveda more rationally. 
 The team at Springer    provided the much needed support that made this work 
possible. Assistant editor of food science Rita Beck, senior editor Susan Safren, editorial director Carolyn Honour, and Springer ofﬁ  cer    William F. Curtis all deserve 
special mention for their efforts in turning an idea into a ﬁ  nished book. 
 A book like this would not be possible    without the wholehearted support of fam-
ily and friends. It was the support I received from my wife Ranjana and son Shashwat that enabled me to fully engage with the task of giving the book its ﬁ  nal form. 
 Words are inadequate to express my indebtedness to Piyari, who offered me 
solace when I was feeling completely forlorn, exhausted, and destitute   . It was a medicine for my soul that healed me all through    and gave me a new life. This is for the love that was showered upon me    selﬂ  essly when I needed it most. Piyari, it is a 
blessing to have you in my life. You have transformed me completely   . 
x
 Finally, I acknowledge all my colleagues, friends, and family who helped me in 
many ways during the process of writing this book. An effort like this is impossible without the support of many people. This book represents the efforts of an entire team working in harmony on different fronts. I salute all who had    a hand in this project in one way or another.  Acknowledgments
xi  Contents 
   Part I Ayurvedic Fundamentals of Food and Nutrition   
    1     Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition: 
Translating Theory into Evidence-Based Practice  ...............................  3   
    Sanjeev   Rastogi    
     2     The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics and Nutrition  .......................  15   
    Ram   Harsh   Singh    
     3     The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications 
for the Modern World  .............................................................................  25   
    Syal   Kumar    
     4     Applying Ayurvedic Eating Principles to the Science 
of Stress-Linked Food Behavior .............................................................  39   
    Sanjeev   Rastogi    
   Part II Integrated Food Science and its Clinical Application        5     Integrating the Science and Art of Using Food as Medicine  ...............  49   
    Sudha   Raj    
     6     Integrated Food and Nutrition in the Management of Diabetes  ........  59   
    Ruchi   Vaidya,         Sudha   Vasudevan,         K.   Manobala,         R.M.   Anjana,     and     V .   Mohan    
     7     Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda  ............................................  67   
    Sanjeev   Rastogi and Priyanka Chaudhari    
     8     Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: 
An Ayurvedic Perspective  .......................................................................  81   
    Sanjoy   Kumar   Pal    
xii
     9     Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm 
of Traditional and Modern Food Science  ..............................................  107   
    Rishi   Pal     and     K.  K.   Pant    
    10     Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, 
and Contemporary Perspective  .............................................................  123   
    Rajiv   Rastogi     and     Devesh   Rastogi     
   Part III  Ayurvedic Food Science: Challenges of Proving 
its Uniqueness in the Purview of Science   
   11     A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary 
Practices as They Relate to Food Practices in Ayurveda  .....................  139    
    Diana I.   Lurie    
   12     From Book to Bedside: Challenges of Translating Ayurvedic 
Science of Food and Nutrition for the Common Beneﬁ  ts ....................  161   
    Sanjeev   Rastogi     
   Index  .................................................................................................................  169    Contents
   Part I 
   Ayurvedic Fundamentals of Food 
and Nutrition        
3 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20141.1            Introduction 
 Much has been done so far in science to understand food and nutrition with the objective 
of deﬁ  ning healthy food, which can ultimately reduce the occurrence as well as the impact 
of disease. At this juncture of advancements made in the ﬁ  eld of food science, a lot remains 
obscure and our understanding is incomplete. We know by virtue of our experience that 
the same food does not act the same in all people. There are differences among likes and 
dislikes of food; and likewise there are differences among people in the quantitative and 
qualitative requirements of food. Many of these mysteries surrounding food appear 
abstract because they defy explanation in terms of contemporary science. Fortunately, 
Ayurveda, the ancient science of healthy living, provides some reasonable explanations 
about the role of food in ensuring health. In this chapter, we will explore Ayurvedic wis-
dom regarding food and nutrition and determine how this knowledge can be understood    in 
terms of science to make it most useful in evidence-based clinical practice.  
1.2     Quantitative Understanding of Food in Ayurveda 
     Matrashi syata   (eat in appropriate quantity) has been the principal motto of 
Ayurveda for those who wish to be healthy [ 1 ]. This emphasizes the fact that indi-
viduals must be aware of their own speciﬁ  c needs in terms of quantity of food. 
Ayurveda takes into account the quantity of food required by each individual. 
 Charaka samhita  , the foremost compendium of Ayurvedic medicine, dedicates a 
whole chapter to various quantity-related aspects of food [ 1 ].     Chapter 1   
 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition: 
Translating Theory into Evidence-Based 
Practice 
             Sanjeev     Rastogi    
        S.   Rastogi      ( *) 
  PG Department of Kaya Chikitsa ,  State Ayurvedic College ,     Lucknow,     India   
 e-mail: rastogisanjeev@rediffmail.com  
4
1.2.1     Appropriate Quantity of Food Required for an Individual 
at a Given Time 
 Matra (quantity) signiﬁ  es the most appropriate quantity of food needed by an indi-
vidual at a given time. Contrary to the serving size idea of modern nutrition, which 
recommends a certain portion of food depending on the individual ʼs age and sex and 
on the type of food [ 2 ], the idea of  ahara matra   (food quantity) is more individual-
ized, dynamic, and ﬂ  exible. Instead of being based upon generic and ﬁ  xed variables 
like a person ʼs age and sex, as in modern nutrition, the Ayurvedic principle of  ahara 
matra   is more subtle and is based on a dynamic interplay of various consumer- and 
food-related factors that may vary on a daily basis. The individualization of  ahara 
matra   in Ayurveda is in stark contrast to modern nutrition, which proposes a more 
generic approach to food quantity.  
1.2.2     Food Requirements May Differ Among People 
of the Same Gender and of Similar Age  
 Contrary to the conventional belief that food requirements may be generic as per 
age and sex, Ayurveda proposes that the food requirements of two people of the 
same age and gender can also vary considerably. Real life provides plenty of such 
examples. Some people need less food to remain healthy compared to other people 
of the same age and gender, who may require much more food.  
1.2.3     Factors Determining the Quantitative Requirements 
of Food in a Person at a Given Time 
 There are consumer-related and food-related factors that determine the quantitative 
requirements of food for a given individual. The two key questions to ask are simply 
what food and for whom? 
1.2.3.1     Consumer-Related Factors:  Agni Bala   
 Among the consumer-related factors,  agni bala      (individual digestive and assimila-
tory capacity) is the principal factor determining the food quantity needed at a given 
time [ 3 ]  agni  signiﬁ  es the metabolic status of a person and is assessed by the diges-
tive and assimilatory functions of an individual operating at various levels. 
Depending on the level of its operation,  agni  can be identiﬁ  ed as those factors S. Rastogi
5
working at the digestive level ( jatharagni  ), tissue level ( dhatvagni  ), and metabolite 
level ( bhutagni  )   . Consumed food is acted upon initially through  jatharagni   for 
digestion followed by  dhatvagni   for its assimilation into tissues and ﬁ  nally by 
 bhutagni  , where individual metabolites are used for various intracellular activities. 
Ayurveda identiﬁ  es  agni  as the principal factor responsible for a separation between 
the retainable ( saara  ) from the excretable ( kitta ). A major function of  agni  at every 
level is to separate the retainable from the excretable of a consumed substance. The 
malfunction of any of these  agni  will lead to an incorrect production of either of 
these products and, ultimately, to disharmony. Food quantity should therefore 
should be considered an  agni  that functions at every level to ensure the ultimate 
healthy fate of a consumed food. 
   Factors Determining  Agni Bala   
 There are two major determinants of  Agni   in Ayurveda. Some are ﬁ  xed or static for 
a particular person based upon his or her body type and are called  prakriti  ; the oth-
ers are dynamic and keep changing depending on the season, time of day, and age. 
Contrary to modern nutrition, Ayurveda does not consider gender a factor in the 
determination of required food quantity. 
   Body Type as a Determinant of  Agni Bala   
  Prakriti   is a genetic–epigenetic conceptualization of Ayurveda that personiﬁ  es 
the genetic–epigenetic interplay of three major body types. These three body 
types are primarily the metabolic variants of individuals functioning variously 
at physical, physiological, and psychological levels [ 4 ]. Depending on their 
metabolic levels, three major body types may be categorized as follows:  Vata  
are irregular metabolizers,  Pitta   are fast metabolizers, and  Kapha   are slow 
metabolizers [ 5 ].  
   Food Requirements According to  Prakriti   
  Vata , for irregular metabolizers, require smaller, yet more frequent, quantities of 
food because they cannot cope with hunger.  Pitta  , the fast metabolizers, require 
large quantities of food per meal and need it more frequently because they also can-
not cope with hunger and thirst. In contrast to these two,  Kaphai  , the slow metabo-
lizers, require smaller quantities of food less frequently because they have a higher 
tolerance for thirst and hunger. There are several obvious implications of determin-
ing food requirements on the basis of  prakriti  . It can be used to determine the fast-
ing tolerance    of people who are fasting. Fasting has been a very popular form of 
religious ritual among Hindus and Muslims. Understanding an individual ʼs  prakriti   
can help in designing fasts depending on the perso nʼs tolerance without 1 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition…
6
compromising his or her physical or religious needs. A few more observations are in 
order regarding  prakriti   in relation to food. Aging is a differential phenomenon as 
some people age faster than others. Aging is determined primarily by metabolic 
activities taking place within cells. Clearly, a cell that is metabolically active will 
age earlier than other, less active cells provided no other protective mechanisms are 
at work to reverse the aging process [ 6 ]. For obvious reasons due to their higher 
metabolic turnover,  Pitta   people age faster than others. This phenomenon is beauti-
fully noted in Ayurveda by observing that  Pitta   is characterized by increased hunger 
and thirst, an early graying and loss of hair, and increased mole formations. Contrary 
to this observation,  Kapha   is characterized by slow metabolic turnover, which is 
observed through lesser food and a greater tolerance for hunger. To arrest premature 
aging, it is important to balance food quantities appropriately in accordance with the 
individual  prakriti   without causing a food deﬁ  cit or overload. The metabolic rate 
also determines individual differences among people. The concept of  prakriti   in 
Ayurveda suggests that every individual is distinct – physiologically, psychologi-
cally, and physically.  
   Dynamic Determinants of  Agni   
 Like most other principles of Ayurveda,  Agni   is also a dynamic entity that varies 
depending on the age of the individual, the time of day, and the season of the year. 
Early age is characterized by a predominance of  Kapha   and therefore is marked by 
 mandagni  . It is a common observation that children are most fussy about food and 
their nutritional statuses are often compromised owing to poor food intake. Middle 
age is marked by a predominance of  Pitta   and hence is marked by  teekshnagni  . This 
is the time when we require a large amount of food at greater frequencies than in 
early or old age. Old age is characterized by a predominance of  Vata  and therefore 
is marked by  vishamagni  , causing an erratic appetite. This warrants careful deci-
sions regarding food intake at every meal in old age, reﬂ  ecting actual appetite and 
not the desire to consume food. 
 Age-related quantitative changes in food intake have scientiﬁ  c support as well. 
Known gastrointestinal (GI) changes occur in humans due to aging. Common 
changes are a decreased taste threshold, hypochlorhydria (low production of gastric 
acid in the stomach   ) due to atrophic gastritis, and decreased liver blood ﬂ  ow and 
size [ 7 ]. These changes reﬂ  ect a reduced functional capability of the GI system and 
indicate a need for reduced quantities of food in the later stages of life. 
 Time of day also requires a careful consideration of food quantity. Morning is the 
time of  kapha  , and so food consumption should be lower, corresponding to  mandagni  . 
Therefore, a smaller breakfast is recommended. Daytime is marked by  pitta , and so 
more substantial consumption is recommended to match  teekshnagni   of  pitta . S. Rastogi
7
Because evening is once again the period of  kapha  , food intake should be reduced at 
that time. A simple notion is that the daytime meal should be heavier than the morning and evening meals, and this is supported by the logic of Ayurveda. 
 The different seasons also affect the level of  agni  in the body and consequently 
affect requirements regarding food intake. Summer is marked by greater  vata  and, 
hence, requires smaller quantities of food compared to winter, when more food is recommended. It is for this reason that summer food should be lighter than winter food.    
1.2.3.2     Food-Related Factors in the Determination of Quantity: Food 
Classiﬁ  cation Based on Digestibility 
 Depending on the time needed for digestion, Ayurveda considers food as  guru   and 
 laghu. Laghu   refers to foods that take less time to digest. Examples of such foods 
are  shali   rice,  shastika   rice, and  mung  . On the other hand,  guru   foods are those that 
take more time to digest. Examples of such foods include those prepared from wheat ( pishta vikriti  ), sugar ( ikshu vikriti  ), or milk ( ksheer vikriti  ). As a general 
rule,  guru   foods should be consumed in smaller quantities than  laghu   foods. 
According to Ayurveda,  laghu   foods are mainly composed of  vayu   and  agni . 
Because of  agni , they have the inherent property of stimulating digestion. A slightly 
excessive intake of  laghu   foods therefore will not cause problems. In contrast,  guru   
foods are mainly composed of  jala  and  prithvi  . Because  Jala  has the property of 
countering  agni , even a slight excess of this food may cause signiﬁ  cant problems. 
To avoid such problems,  guru   foods should be consumed only partially   .   
1.2.4     Determining Whether Food Is Consumed 
in the Right Quantity 
  Anupahatya prakriti yatha kaalam jaram gacchati   has been the observational 
method for knowing whether food is being consumed in the proper quantities.  Anupahatya prakriti   is that quantity of food that can be consumed without any 
adverse effects on the physical or physiological functions of an individual.  Yatha 
kaalam jaram gacchati   is that quantity of food that gets digested within a reason-
able amount of time. As a consequence, if the proper quantity of food is consumed, one should not feel heavy or lethargic, and one should feel hungry at the appropriate time owing to the timely digestion of the consumed food.  1 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition…
8
1.2.5     Implications of Inappropriate  Ahara Matra   
 An inappropriate quantity of food may lead to various undesired consequences. 
Besides commonly understood consequences such as under- or overnutrition, there 
can be a cascade of consequences related to excessive  ahara matra   identiﬁ  ed as 
 Ama  and related pathogenesis.  Ama , literally meaning  unripe  , is considered to be a 
byproduct of inefﬁ  cient digestion at various levels of  Agni  . This has the property of 
clogging and clinging within pathways, resulting in a blockade and interruption in 
normal physiology. 
1.2.5.1      Ama   and Related Disorders 
 A huge number of clinical conditions having immunological or autoimmune bases 
   are linked to  ama  pathogenesis. Overnutrition has been found to be an essential 
component of every pathogenesis related to  ama  [ 8 ]. Some common clinical condi-
tions related to  ama  are as follows:
•    Chronic skin conditions including eczema  
•   Lethargy, chronic fatigue syndrome  
•   Various joint and connective tissue disorders    
  Ama  digestion therefore has become the foremost principle of treatment of such 
conditions in Ayurveda.   
1.2.6     Contemporary Factors Driving Food Quantity 
 Many factors other than individual susceptibility and preferences also act synergis-
tically in determining the quantity of food that is ultimately consumed. Regarding 
obesity, oversized meal portions may go undetected and seem normal in a certain 
context, eventually leading to overeating without being noticed. Some common fac-
tors involved in miscalculating food quantities are as follows:
•    Variable size and weight of bread (eating the same number of slices of bread of 
variable weight)  
•   Variable size of spoons and bowls (measuring quantity through the number of 
spoons or bowls)  
•   Snacking between meals while thinking that one has had only two regular meals  
•   High-calorie food in smaller quantities thinking that one has consumed a lesser 
amount of food      S. Rastogi
9
1.3     Scientiﬁ  c Rationale of Quantitative Awareness 
of Food in Ayurveda 
1.3.1     Sensory-Speciﬁ  c Satiety 
 Quantitative determination of diet in Ayurveda is primarily based upon a sensory- 
speciﬁ  c satiety (SSS) regulation system where one gradually loses the liking for a 
speciﬁ  c food after consuming it to the satiety level [ 9 ]. We recently have learned 
that SSS is a complex phenomenon with a number of attributes, including olfactory 
and gustatory reduction of pleasantness of a food following exposure to it for a 
certain amount of time [ 10 ]. It is also a volume-dependent factor, not component 
dependent one (Bell et al. 2003   ) [ 11 ]. 
1.3.1.1     Method of Intake and Sensory-Speciﬁ  c Satiety 
 A concentrated, undisturbed, and focused mealtime, without too many distractions 
   and properly masticated food, helps us perceive SSS quickly and helps us in judging 
when to stop eating. As long as we can recognize SSS, overeating is not an issue. 
Ayurvedic principles on the methods of food intake, popularly called  Ashta ahara 
vidhi visheshayatana  , are deﬁ  nitive ways of recognizing SSS to identify the appro-
priate  ahara matra  .   
1.3.2     Food Digestibility Index 
 Based on their digestibility status, foods may be grouped as follows:
•    Rapidly digestible food  
•   Slowly digestible food  
•   Resistant food    
 When determining the quantity of a food to consume, its digestibility should be 
taken into account. Food that is simple and easy to digest may be consumed in larger 
quantities than food that is complex and, hence, more difﬁ  cult to digest. The 
Ayurvedic concepts of  guru   (complex) and  laghu   (simple) foods contain a similar 
notion of digestibility. 
1.3.2.1     Implications of Food Digestibility 
 Slowly digested starches (SDSs) have been found to blunt the postprandial increase 
and subsequent decline of plasma glucose and insulin concentrations, leading to 1 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition…
10
prolonged energy availability and satiety, compared to more rapidly digested 
starches. Sandsa et al. [ 12 ] examined the postprandial metabolic and appetitive 
responses of a slowly digested starch [wax maize (WM)] and compared it with rap-
idly digested carbohydrate, a maltodextrin-sucrose mixture (MS). The results sup-
ported the idea that WM promotes sustained glucose availability in young, 
insulin-sensitive adults [ 12 ]. For their long yet slow release properties, slowly 
digested substances are recommended in smaller quantities compared to rapidly 
digested substances required to meet immediate energy needs.  
1.3.2.2     Implications of Ayurvedic Concepts of Food Digestibility 
 The Ayurvedic concepts of  guru   and  laghu   foods may have special implications for 
various target groups looking for ideal food combinations. In debility after a pro-
longed disease where rapid replenishment of nutrients is required   , a large quantity 
of  laghu   foods that are easily and rapidly digested and subsequently metabolized 
may be more suitable. In contrast, for an obese,    a ﬁ  lling and satisfying  guru   food 
could suppress the hunger urge for a longer amount of time compared to other 
foods. In normal conditions, there should be a useful combination    of  guru   and  laghu   
foods in the diet.    
1.4     Ayurvedic Principles of Food Preparation and Intake 
1.4.1     Eight Points of Consideration in Reference to Food 
Preparation and Intake 
  Ashta ahara vidhi visheshayatana  , or eight principles of food preparation and 
intake, was among the most important contributions of Ayurveda to wholesome eat-
ing. These eight components incorporate various measures in relation to food prepa-
ration, combination, storage, and consumption. What follows is a description of the 
important aspects of these eight principles of healthy eating. 
1.4.1.1      Prakriti   
  The prakriti   of a food represents the integral characterstics that are reﬂ  ected through 
a set of opposing properties called  gurvadi guna   (guru = heavy, adi = etcetera). 
These properties primarily represent the elemental ( panchamahabhuta  ) predomi-
nance of a food. The ultimate biological effects of food are therefore largely depen-
dent upon the  prakriti   of the food. The following list shows these properties and 
their opposite features:S. Rastogi
11
  Guru   (heavy)   Laghu   (light) 
  Sheet   (cold)   Ushna   (hot) 
  Snigdha   (smooth)   Ruksha   (rough) 
  Manda   (slow acting)   Teekshana   (fast acting) 
  Sthir   (stable)   Sara  (movable) 
  Mridu   (soft)   Kathin   (hard) 
  Vishada   (nonmucilagenous)   Picchila   (mucilaginous) 
  Slakshana   (ﬁ ne)   Khara   (coarse) 
  Sthool   (gross)   Sukshma   (subtle) 
  Sandra   (concentrated)   Drava   (liquid) 
1.4.1.2         Karana   (Properties Induced by Food Processing) 
  Karana   are the properties that are induced in food through its processing. Various 
methods used to enforce new properties in foods include processing with water or heat; cleaning or washing; rotating; saturating    with other liquids; storing and keep-ing in a special vessel.  
1.4.1.3      Sanyoga   (Properties Induced by Food Combination) 
 Food combination is also supposed to evolve new properties in foods that are other-
wise not available in the independent components of the combination. These com-binations may act through the mechanism of synergism or antagonism.   
1.4.2     Methods of Food Intake 
 Ayurveda also proposes some speciﬁ  c protocols for food intake. These are enumer-
ated as follows:
    Ushna   (hot)  
   Snigdha   (smooth, lubricated)  
   Mataravata   (in appropriate quantity)  
   Jeerne   (once the previously consumed food is digested)  
   Viryaviruddhama   (compatible)  
   Ishte Deshe   (at appropriate place and in appropriate position)  
   Ishta Sarvopakaranama   (satisfying all personal preferences   )  
   Nati Drutam      (slowly)  
   Nati Vilambita      (not too slow)  
   Ajalpan   (without talking)  
   Ahasan   (without laughing)  
   Tanmana   (with adequate concentration)     1 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition…
12
1.4.3     Implications of Observing the Methods of Food Intake 
 To observe SSS without getting perverted, Ayurvedic methods of food intake are 
essential. Observing these methods may help to trigger the neurohumoral aspect of 
food digestion so that SSS may remain fully functional. These methods can also 
help one to avoid certain foods and problems related to their consumption.   
1.5     Qualitative Attributes of Food 
 In addition to the classiﬁ  cation of food on the basis of its digestibility and appropri-
ateness for human consumption, Ayurveda classiﬁ  es foods on the basis of abstract 
qualitative attributes affecting the mind and body of the consumer. The three kinds 
of food, namely  Sata ,  Raja  , and  Tama  , are usually preferred by people of similar 
dispositions and temperaments. These foods tend to support the properties in accor-
dance with their inherent qualities [ 13 ]. 
 Among these three kinds of food, those that are fresh, smooth, stable, and pleas-
ant in taste and appearance are  satvika   foods. This type of food is promotive of life, 
health, mental abilities, physical strength, and pleasure [ 14 ]. Examples of such 
foods are freshly prepared foods, fresh fruits, and milk.  Raja      foods are bitter, sour, 
salty, hot, spicy, and dry. A burning sensation is often experienced after the con-
sumption of  raja  foods.  Raja   food may cause sorrow, grief, and disease [ 15 ]. Most 
junk and preserved food consumed today belongs to the  raja  category. Their harm-
ful effects on health are obvious. 
 Contaminated, dried, spoiled, old, stale, and fermented foods are considered 
 tamasika  . These types of food cloud the mind and affect its proper functioning [ 16 ].  
1.6     Translating the Food and Nutrition Theory of Ayurveda 
into Practice 
 Despite the many    excellent and wholesome components in the Ayurvedic view of 
food and nutrition, due to a lack of evidence and a lack of objectivity, sometimes it 
seems too cumbersome to translate these ideas into practice. In terms of the single 
most important area of devising an individualized food plan for everyone, ﬁ  rst we 
need to know deﬁ  nitely about an individual ʼs  prakriti  . Until recently, there were no 
substantiated methods that could have drawn valid, unambiguous conclusions about 
healthy individuals ʼ  prakriti   [ 17 ,  18 ]. With the development of a Prototype Prakriti 
Analysis Tool (PPAT), we are now hopeful that we will have the ability to make 
evidence-based determinations regarding the  prakriti   of an individual [ 19 ]. 
 The Ayurvedic  prakriti   doctrine has an empirical, genetic component that is 
currently attracting more scientiﬁ  c attention, and it is becoming more widely S. Rastogi
13
understood that all people have their own unique qualities with respect to the avail-
ability or expression of certain genes associated with speciﬁ  c metabolic functions. 
Human anatomy and physiology, and their neuro-psychological    functions, may dif-
fer slightly with regard to these functions [ 20 ,  21 ]. It would be very interesting to 
determine whether or not a  prakriti   analysis could be conducted for use as a clinical 
tool to decipher human genome speciﬁ  cations in reference to variable human behav-
ior and functions. If conﬁ  rmed, this may ﬁ  nd extensive applications in deﬁ  ning the 
substrates that may up- or downregulate the functions of speciﬁ  c genes in the pro-
motion or suppression of the speciﬁ  c functions of those genes [ 22 ,  23 ]. 
 Much remains to be done to deﬁ  ne various abstract concepts of Ayurvedic nutri-
tion    to develop their evidence-based practical applications. Determining food quan-
tity depending on an individual ʼs digestive system    and age and on the type of food 
chosen, season and time of day are another complex area requiring a lot of research 
before a ﬁ  rm conclusions can be drawn. Deﬁ  ning  guru   and  laghu   foods on the basis 
of their digestibility can best be approached by exposing various foods to various 
enzyme solutions and noting the reactions in a time-dependent manner. The total 
amount of time required to digest certain foods completely    may give a clear indica-
tion regarding the  guru   or  laghu   status of a food. Such in vitro studies, although 
perhaps not fully addressing various confounding aspects of food digestion that 
occur in vivo, would at least provide some sort of idea about the possible nature of 
food and its digestibility. 
 Functional food is another domain where Ayurveda specializes   . Various pro-
cessed and unprocessed foods mentioned in Ayurveda    are known for their special 
properties, often called their  prabhava.   It is surprising to see how Ayurveda may 
explain many processed and unprocessed foods on the basis of their physiological 
effects and the beneﬁ  ts they offer. What is required is to validate all the insights of 
Ayurveda in terms of contemporary science to obtain further conﬁ  rmation of their 
effective and reliable use in maintaining human health.     
      References 
     1.   Charaka Samhita, Charaka (1998) In: Tripathi BN (ed) Sutra Stahan Matrashitiya adhyaya. 
Chaukhamba Orientalia, Varanasi  
    2.   United States Department of Agriculture.   www.mypyramid.gov    . Accessed Dec 2012  
    3.       Purvya MC, Meena MS (2011) A review of role of prakriti in aging. Ayu 32:20–24  
    4.    Rastogi S (2010) Building bridges between Ayurveda and modern science. Int J Ayurveda Res 
1(1):41–46  
    5.    Patel MR (2010) Applying the knowledge of Ayurveda to appraise the US nutritional para-
digm, a thesis submitted in partial fulﬁ  lment of the requirements for the degree of clinical 
Ayurvedic specialist. California College of Ayurveda, Nevada  
    6.       Rastogi S (2012) Transforming Ayurveda. In: Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, 
Singh RH (eds) Stepping into the realm of evidence – based practice in evidence based practice 
in complementary and alternative medicine: perspectives, protocols, problems and potentials 
in Ayurveda. Springer, Berlin, pp 33–50  
    7.    Rastogi S (2009) Ayurveda for comprehensive health care. Indian J Med Ethics 6(2):101–102  1 Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition…
14
    8.    Rastogi S (2012) Gut and joint interconnections: a reappraisal to Ayurvedic understanding of 
joint diseases. In: Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, Singh RH (eds) Evidence based 
practice in complementary and alternative medicine: protocols, pitfall and potential in 
Ayurveda. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 139–158  
    9.    Smith JM, Ditschun TL (2009) Controlling satiety: how environmental factors inﬂ  uence food 
intake. Trends Food Sci Technol 20:271–277  
    10.    Olsen A, Ritz C, Hartvig DL, Moller P (2011) Comparison of sensory speciﬁ  c satiety and 
sensory speciﬁ  c desires to eat in children and adults. Appetite 57:6–13  
    11.    Englyst HN, Kingman SM, Cummings JH (1992) Classiﬁ  cation and measurement of nutrition-
ally important starch fractions. Eur J Clin Nutr 46(Suppl 2):33–50  
     12.    Sandsa AL, Leidyb HJ, Hamakercd BR, Maguiree P, Campbellad WW (2009) Consumption of 
the slow-digesting waxy maize starch leads to blunted plasma glucose and insulin response but 
does not inﬂ  uence energy expenditure or appetite in humans. Nutr Res 29:383–390  
    13.   Srimadabhagvadgita, Chapter 17/7 (2010) Geeta Press, Gorakhpur  
    14.   Srimadabhagvadgita, Chapter 17/8 (2010) Geeta Press, Gorakhpur  
    15.   Srimadabhagvadgita, Chapter 17/9 (2010) Geeta Press, Gorakhpur  
    16.   Srimadabhagvadgita, Chapter 17/10 (2010) Geeta Press, Gorakhpur  
    17.    Rastogi S (2012) Prakriti analysis in Ayurveda: reappraising the need of better diagnostic 
tools. In: Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, Singh RH (eds) Evidence based practice 
in complementary and alternative medicine: perspectives, protocols, problems and potentials 
in Ayurveda. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 99–112  
    18.    Rastogi S, Chiappelli F (2010) Bringing evidence basis to decision making in complementary 
and alternative medicine (CAM): prakriti (constitution) analysis in Ayurveda. In: Chiappelli F 
et al (eds) Evidence-based practice towards optimizing clinical outcomes. Springer, Berlin, pp 
91–106  
    19.    Rastogi S (2012) Development and validation of a prototype prakriti analysis tool: inferences 
from a pilot study. Ayu 33:2  
    20.    Lurie D (2012) Ayurveda and pharmacogenomics. Ann Ayurvedic Med 4:126–128  
    21.    Bhalerao S, Deshpande T, Thatte U (2012) Prakriti (Ayurvedic concept of constitution) and 
variations in platelet aggregation. BMC Complement Altern Med 12:248. 
doi:  10.1186/1472-6882-12-248      
    22.    Rizzo-Sierra CV (2011) Ayurvedic genomics, constitutional psychology and endocrinology: 
the missing connection. J Altern Complement Med 17:1–5  
    23.    Sethi TP, Prasher B, Mukerjie M (2011) Ayurgenomics: a new way of threading molecular 
variability for stratiﬁ  ed medicine. ACS Chem Biol 6:875–880    S. Rastogi
15 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_2, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20142.1            Introduction 
 Food and diet are the most essential requirements of all living beings. Ayurveda, the 
ancient life and health science originating from India, considers food in a deeply 
comprehensive understanding, attaching to it notable emotional and spiritual sig-
niﬁ cance, in addition to its material and biological attributes. According to Ayurveda 
(CS.Su.28:45) the living human body and the diseases that afﬂ  ict it are both the 
products of food [ 1 ]. The Vedic texts count food a lifelike phenomenon ( Pranah  ). 
Food is considered one of the three  Upastambhas   of life, meaning that life cannot 
be sustained without food.  Ahara   is categorized as  Hitahara   (wholesome) and 
 Ahitahara   (unwholesome) .  In a similar context, the terms  Pathya   and  Apathya   are 
also used to denote the acceptability and adoptability of a particular food in a given 
context. The Ayurvedic texts place great emphasis on the compatibility and incom-
patibility of certain foods. Caraka describes in detail the 18-fold denominators of 
 Viruddhahara     , i.e., dietary incompatibility. Ayurveda emphasizes the material qual-
ity of food but places even greater emphasis on the selection of food, its processing 
and cooking, and rules for healthy eating   . Thus the Ayurvedic approach to food and 
dietetics is very different from the conventional Western approach. 
 Although  Ahara  /food is derived by an individual from the environment, its pro-
cessing and use intimately depend on the integrity of internal biomechanisms. The 
sheet anchors in nutritional    processes are (1) the integrity of  Agnibala   and (2) 
 Srotabala  . Unless the  Agni/  bioﬁ re system and  Srotamsi/  inner biotransport system 
are in order, processes of nutrition may not accomplish   . Hence it is imperative to 
discuss  Ahara  ,  Agni  , and  Srotas   in a close continuum   .  Ahara   is essentially a 
 Panchabhautic   entity    and can be related accordingly to the theories of  Triguna   and 
 Tridosh  . Likewise, the living human body is also  Panchabhautic  , and accordingly     Chapter 2   
 The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics 
and Nutrition 
              Ram     Harsh     Singh    
         R.  H.   Singh      ( *) 
  Kayachikitsa, Institute of Medical Sciences ,  Banaras Hindu University ,   Varanasi ,  India   
 e-mail: rh_singh2001@yahoo.com  
16
its functions are governed according to the laws of  Triguna   and  Tridosh  , both in 
relation to the states of  Prakriti   and  Vikriti  . The environment around us is also a 
 Panchabhautic   milieu that manifests in terms of the environmental rhythms of 
 Adana  - visarga kala   and  Sad-ritus   and their chronobiological impacts. Thus 
Ayurveda urges dietary planning in close consideration of nature and environmental 
factors on the one hand and the  Prakriti   and  Vikriti   of the individual on the other 
hand. Over and above the integrity    of A gnibala   and  Srotabala   one should be mind-
ful of maintaining the good nutritional status of an organism. 
 In addition to food and diet, Ayurveda propounds a separate concept of medici-
nal dietary supplements in the context of  Rasayana therapy  , which forms one of the 
eight branches of classical  Astanga Ayurveda   in which a wide range of medicinal 
and nonmedicinal restorative remedies is described. A  Rasayana   may be in the form 
of a dietary article, a restorative drug, or a healthy life style. The  Rasayanas   are 
claimed to be something like nutraceuticals. They improve the nutritional status of 
an individual and help in procuring the best qualities of  Dhatus  , i.e., bodily cells and 
tissues, through their positive action at the level of  Rasa  ,  Agni  , and  Srotas.   The 
Ayurvedic texts describe a large number of  Rasayana   remedies that can be used as 
dietary supplements. The  Rasayanas   not only improve gross nutritional status; it is 
also claimed that they are immune enhancers and antiaging and biobalancing rem-
edies in Ayurveda that possess a range of speciﬁ  c and nonspeciﬁ  c actions [ 2 ].  
2.2     Food and Its Material Components 
 As stated earlier, all articles of food are comprised of ﬁ  ve basic elements/ 
 Panchamahabhutas  : (1)  Akasha/ether,   (2)  Vayu/air  , (3)  Teja/ﬁ  re  , (4)  Jala/water  , and 
(5)  Prithvi/earth  , which are the ﬁ  ve fundamental qualities of matter possibly com-
prised of distinct categories of quantum clusters in terms of modern physics. The 
three  Doshas   –  vata-pitta-kapha   – are the biological derivatives of the ﬁ  ve 
 Mahabhutas  , and the  Trigunas   –  sattva-rajas-tamasa   – are the initiating causal 
qualities responsible for the creation of the material world, including food. The fol-
lowing table approximately depicts the relationships [ 3 ].
   Sattva Akasha Vata
Vayu
Rajas Teja Pitta
Jala
Tamas Prithvi Kapha
  R.H. Singh
17
    In accordance with the preceding discussion of the basic nature    of food, different 
articles of food manifest their qualities, potencies, tastes, and nutritional attributes 
to the body according to the relative preponderance of the  Panchabhautic   composi-
tion and related  Trigunatmaka   and  Tridoshic   properties. A balanced diet in Ayurveda 
is planned in relation to the known  Panchabhautic   composition and  Tridoshic   
impacts in the living body. The following table depicts some of these features, 
which may help in planning a diet [ 4 ]:
  Sadarasa   (tastes)   Panchabhautic      composition  Biological impact 
  Kapha     Pitta     Vata  
  1. Madhura/  sweet   Jala  +  Prithvi    ↑↑  ↓↓  ↓ 
  2. Amla/  sour   Prithvi   +  Agni    ↑↑  ↑↑  ↓ 
  3. Lavana/  salt   Agni   +  Jala   ↑↑  ↑↑  ↓ 
  4. Katu/  pungent   Vayu   +  Agni    ↓  ↓  ↑↑ 
  5. Tikta/  bitter   Akash   +  Vayu    ↓  ↑↑  ↑ 
  6. Kashaya/  astringent   Vayu   +  Prithvi    ↓↓  ↓  ↑ 
2.2.1        Gunas/  Physical Properties and Their Attributes 
 The Ayurvedic classics describe 20 basic properties of physical materials constitut-
ing the whole range of living and nonliving objects in this world, such as articles of 
food, drugs, all vegetation, minerals present in the environment, and bodily cells 
and tissues. The following 20  Gunas   form the basic matrix of the transformation of 
the  panchabhautic      matter into living biologic factors in a living body:
 1.  Guru  /heavy   2.  Laghu  /light  11.  Ghana  /dense  12.  Drava  /liquid 
 3.  Manda  /slow   4.  Tiksna  /sharp  13.  Mridu  /soft  14.  Kathin  /hard 
 5.  Sheeta  /cold   6.  Ushna  /hot  15.  Sthira  /stable  16.  Chala  /mobile 
 7.  Snigdha  /oily   8.  Shuska  /dry  17.  Sukshma  /subtle  18.  Sthula  /gross 
 9.  Picchila  /slimy  10.  Ruksha  /rough  19.  Shlakshna  /clear  20.  Avila  /cloudy 
   These physical properties, as found in various articles of food and drugs, produce 
similar effects on the body when administered and deplete the opposite properties 
in accordance with the theory of  Samanya   and  Vishesha  , i.e., homologous versus 
heterologous, as described in Ayurvedic texts [ 5 ].  
2.2.2     Sources of Food Described in Ayurveda 
 The Ayurvedic texts describe 12 categories of food sources reﬂ  ecting the then avail-
able varieties of food in historical perspective. A look at this classic information 
reveals that the whole range of food currently in use today remains the same as was 2 The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics and Nutrition
18
originally identiﬁ  ed during the classical age of Ayurveda. These 12 categories of 
food are as follows.
 1.  Shukadhanya   (corn)   7.  Madya Barga   (wines) 
 2.  Shamidhanya   (pulses)   8.  Ambu Barga   (water) 
 3.  Mamsa Barga   (meat)   9.  Gorasa Barga   (milk and milk products) 
 4.  Shaka Barga   (vegetables)  10.  Ikshu Vikara   (sugar cane and related products) 
 5. Phala  Barga   (fruits)  11.  Kritanna Barga   (cooked products) 
 6.  Harita Barga   (greens)  12.  Aharayoni   (food adjuvants) 
2.3         Fundaments of Ayurvedic Biology 
 Thus, it would appear from the preceding descriptions that Ayurveda presents an 
entirely different version of biology in tune with its three unique features and 
approaches to studying and practicing biology and medicine,  viz . (1) a pronature 
approach, (2) a holistic approach, and (3) a personalized approach to health care and 
treatment. In accordance with its theory of  Swabhavoparamvada  , Ayurveda teaches 
that a living body has powerful self-healing capacities, and whenever a disease afﬂ  icts 
us or a disease-causing factor invades our body, our body immediately starts counter-
acting the causal factor toward self-healing without waiting for an external aid or 
medication [ 6 ]. Hence a physician should always respect the natural response and 
should not apply any intervention that might obstruct the ongoing auto-healing pro-
cess. All external artiﬁ  cial interventions, as far as possible, should be planned in such 
a way that the organism remains protected by nature. Natural food and diet represent 
one such attempt, in addition to many other strategies, that an Ayurvedic health pro-
vider may recommend. This is called the pronature approach of Ayurveda [ 7 ]. 
 In view of the fact that a living mind–body system is a holistic entity, just as a 
disease entity is a complex holistic phenomenon, all efforts at providing health care 
and disease management must follow a holistic and inclusive approach, considering 
the whole organism as a single unit. In addition, disease should be managed in a 
holistic manner with a view toward overall life style management, dietetics, exer-
cise, psychospiritual support, and medications where needed [ 8 ]. A reductionist 
approach is not welcome at any level in this system. 
 The third most important feature of Ayurveda is its personalized health care. 
Ayurveda believes that no two people are truly identical; each individual is unique 
in his or her biology and ill health. All individuals require individualized care 
depending on their unique  Prakriti   and  Vikriti   in line with their genomic proﬁ  les. 
Ayurveda classiﬁ  es humanity into seven  Prakriti   types that are genetically deter-
mined in terms of the  Tridosha   theory of Ayurveda. Recent developments in the 
ﬁ eld of modern pharmacogenomics are now gradually converging toward the 
ancient Ayurvedic theory of  Dosha prakriti   and its relevance for patterns of disease 
susceptibility and treatment response [ 9 ]. The suitability or unsuitability of a par-
ticular food and diet is also governed by the same principle. A dietician should plan 
her clients ʼ diet taking into consideration  Prakriti.    R.H. Singh
19
2.4     Processing of Food and Its Consumption 
 The ultimate impact of a food depends not on its material qualities but largely on its 
processing, i.e., cooking and the discipline of eating. The foremost Ayurvedic clas-sic  Caraka Samhita   (CS.Vi. 1:21) describes the eight principles of  Ahara vidhi  : (1) 
 Prakriti   (natural quality), (2)  Karana   (preparation), (3)  Samyoga   (combinations), 
(4)  Rashi   (quantity), (5)  Desha   (habitat and climate), (6)  Kala   (temporal factor), (7) 
 Upayoga Samstha   (rules of use), and (8)  Upayokta   (the user). Similarly,  Susruta   
(SS.U.64:56) describes 12-fold considerations to be followed during the consump-tion of food .  Caraka (CS . Su.26:86–87) describes the basic tenets of  Viruddhahara  , 
or dietetic incompatibility, which constitutes a fundamental consideration in plan-ning a diet that is appropriate for an individual in a given situation. The 18-fold factors of dietetic incompatibility    as described by Caraka are listed below:  
2.5     Dietary Incompatibility ( Viruddhahara  ) 
 1.  Desha viruddha  /climate  10.  Avastha viruddha  /patient’s state 
 2.  Kala viruddha  /season  11.  Krama viruddha  /order of eating 
 3.  Agni viruddha  /digestive power  12.  Parihara viruddha  /restrictions 
 4.  Matra viruddha  /measure  13.  Upachara viruddha  /observances 
 5.  Satmya viruddha  /adaptability  14.  Paka viruddha  /cooking 
 6.  Dosh viruddha  /body humors  15.  Samyoga viruddha  /combination 
 7.  Samskara viruddha  /processing  16.  Hridaya viruddha  /palatibility 
 8.  Virya viruddha  /potency  17.  Sampata viruddha  /rich quality 
 9.  Koshtha viruddha  /bowel habits  18.  Vidhi viruddha  /mealtime rules 
   In addition to these factors of dietetic incompatibility, Caraka describes six 
important factors in determining the qualitative acceptability of an article of food irrespective of its material composition. These factors determine the  pathya-apathya   
nature of food as mentioned below: (1)  Matra   (measure), (2)  Kala   (time), (3)  Kriya   
(mode of preparation), (4)  Bhumi   (habitat), (5)  Deha   (body constitution), and (6) 
 Dosha   (morbidity factors).  
2.6     Dietary Supplements and Nutraceuticals 
 As mentioned earlier, besides the core consideration of food and diet, Ayurveda also 
proposes a comprehensive science of medicinal dietary supplements in the context of  Rasayana Tantra  , which constitutes one of the eight branches of  Astanga 
Ayurved  a (CS.Ci.1, SS.Ci.27–30). The  Rasayanas   are not merely food supplements 
in the crude material sense. They are dynamic biofactors responsible for molecular nutrition, immunity enhancement, and longevity promotion. Most  Rasayanas   2 The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics and Nutrition
20
produce their nourishing and rejuvenating effect by acting as direct nutrients, by 
promoting the  Agni Bala  , or by way of  Srotoprasadan  , resulting in an improved 
nutritional status, further leading to an improved quality of  Dhatus   or body tissues. 
Although the  Rasayans   are a generic class    of restorative and rejuvenative supple-
ments, many  Rasayans   could be tissue and organ speciﬁ  c such as  Medhya Rasayana   
for the brain   ,  Hridya Rasayana   for the heart,  Twacya Rasayana      for the skin, and so 
on. Similarly, age-speciﬁ  c  Rasayans      can be used to compensate for age-related 
biolosses as described by Vagbhatt and Sharangdhara,  Balyam-briddhih-Chhabih- 
Medha-Twak-Dristi-Shukra-Vikaramau  ;  Buddhih-Karmendriyam Ceto Jivitam 
Dashasto hraset  . On the other hand, as pointed out by Susruta and commentator 
Dalhana, certain  Rasayanas   are claimed to be disease speciﬁ  c such as  Shilajatu   for 
 Prameha   and  Tubarak   for  Kustha      [  10 ]. Thus, in considering the Ayurvedic concept 
of food and nutrition it is necessary to refer to  Rasayanas   and their place as food 
supplements and as nutraceuticals. The deeper aspects of  Rasayana   therapy and 
rejuvenation, or  Kayakalpa  , of course, require separate consideration.  
2.7     Host Biofactors in Ayurvedic Nutrition 
 As stated earlier, the processes of nutrition and its ultimate impact in living bodies 
is not the sole attribute of the physical composition of food items; rather they are 
largely governed by a range of host biofactors such as the integrity of  Agnibala   and 
 Srotabala  , i.e., digestive and metabolic ﬁ  re and the inner transport system of an 
individual. Besides the three  Doshas   and seven  Dhatus  , the other most important 
biomechanisms involved in human physiology are the 13 types of  Agnis   located in 
the gut ( Jatharagni  ), in tissues (seven  Dhatvagnis  ), and in molecules (ﬁ  ve 
 Bhutagnis  ), which are responsible for the entire process of digestion of food and its 
metabolism. In addition, a living body contains innumerable microchannels called 
 Srotas   representing a unique quantized inner transport system that is responsible for 
transporting all biological ﬂ  uids, nutrients, excretables, impulses, energy, emotions, 
and thoughts. Ayurveda considers that these channels may be crude as well as sub-
tle, both tangible and intangible, performing their functions in a quantized fashion. 
There are as many  Srotamsi   in the body as there are biofactors conducting life 
process –  Yavantah bhavavisheshah tavantevasmin prakara-visheshah  . (CS.Vi.5). 
This is why the classics proclaim: S rotomayam hi shariram      (Caraka). The relevance 
of the  Srotas   system, with the phenomenon of proper nutrition, is obvious from the 
statement of Caraka (CS. Su.25:45) in deﬁ  ning the  Pathya   or good diet, meaning 
that  Pathya   (right nutrition) is that which does not create difﬁ  culties in transactions 
of the  Srotas   function in an organism [ 11 ]. 
 It cannot be overemphasized that the entire process of  Dhatu Poshan  , or nourish-
ment, operates through the three basic  Nyayas  , or biotransport mechanisms: (1) 
 Kedarikulya Nyaya   (microcirculation and tissue perfusion), (2)  Khale Kapota 
Nyaya   (selective uptake of nutrients by corresponding cells and tissues), (3) 
 Ksiradadhi Nyaya   (assimilation and biotransformation). All three  Nyayas   will R.H. Singh
21
function properly only if there is optimum integrity of  Agnibala   and  Srotabala.   
Merely enriching the material components of food is not enough to ensure good 
nutrition. 
 Thus, Ayurveda proposes an entirely different approach to food, diet, and nutri-
tion that is in strong contrast to the conventional Western approach. Ayurvedic 
dietetics places greater emphasis on processing food, its compatibility, and rules of 
food consumption. It considers the ﬁ  nal impact of nutrition in the human body as a 
holistic attribute of the quality of food and its consumption as well as host factors 
such as  Agnibala   and  Srotabala.   Nutrition and dietetics should be practiced as a 
comprehensive science of nutrition encompassing food as well as host factors as 
discussed previously.  
2.8     Conventional Versus Traditional Understanding 
 Conventional modern medicine suggests that food is essential for sustaining life. 
Fundamentally, food and nutrition serve three basic functions in the body: (1) as a 
source of energy for day-to-day bodily functions, (2) as the source of biomaterials 
for the growth and repair of daily wear and tear, and (3) to assist in certain vital 
functions of the body. The gross essential components of food are (1) carbohy-
drates, (2) fat, (3) protein, (4) vitamins, (5) minerals, and (6) water. Carbohydrates 
and fat provide energy to the body. Proteins are the building blocks for growth and 
repair, while vitamins and minerals assist in a range of vital functions in the body. 
Water is an important component of food and is essential for hydration and circula-
tory functions. Depending on a person ʼs age and a range of functional conditions, 
different individuals require different proportions of these food components. 
A proper combination and proportion of food components is called a balanced diet 
and is formulated by a dietician based on rational principles. 
 Ayurveda has its own approach to planning a daily diet for an individual. It is not 
based on conventional chemistry; rather, it is based on classical  Panchmahabhautic   
chemistry and  Tridoshic   functions. As such, Ayurveda considers the planning of a 
biobalancing diet rather than a balanced diet. Besides the physics of  Panch mahab-
huta  and biology of  Tridosha  , Ayurveda puts great emphasis on the  Trigunatmaka   
consideration of food, stressing especially a  Sattwika   diet, which is preferred for all. 
A  Sattwika   diet is one that is light and easy to digest and leaves minimal residue 
after digestion; at the same time, a  Sattwika   diet should contain an adequate amount 
of nutrients needed for the vital organs of the body, such as the brain, heart, and 
sense organs, rather than merely nourishing the support structures like bones and 
muscles. Such a diet, it is claimed, directs the body–mind system toward a positive 
balance of  Sattwa guna.   
 Ayurveda thus adopts a very different approach to the science of food and nutri-
tion as reﬂ  ected by its fundamental features – a holistic and pronature approach and 
an emphasis on personalized considerations based on the concept of  Prakriti   and 
 Vikriti   [ 11 ].  2 The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics and Nutrition
22
2.9     Life-Style Factor in Health and Disease 
 Ayurveda places great emphasis on the impact of a positive life style on health 
 preservation and the role of a negative life style in the promotion of disease. The 
whole range of  Swasthavritta  ,  Sadvritta  , and  Acara Rasayana   described in the 
Ayurvedic classics is designed to foster a healthy life style for everyone as a promo-
tive and preventive health care   , which is the main focus of Ayurveda. An unhealthy 
life style leads to  Agnibala Vaisamya  ,  Ojabala Dosha  , and  Sroto   distortion, leading 
in turn to a variety of ailments and immunocompromised states. Similarly, different 
kinds of tangible and intangible    environmental factors, as depicted in Ayurvedic 
classics in the context of  Ayoga-Atiyoga-Mithyayoga   of  Kala-Buddhi-Indriyartha  , 
popularly described as  Kala-Parinam  ,  Prajnaparadha  , and  Asatmyendriyartha 
Samyoga  , obviously lead to ill health and disease. The three classical categories of 
aetiological factors have been considered as primary causes of all diseases in 
Ayurveda; all other tangible causes of disease are secondary to these primary causes 
[ 12 ]. The classical  Hetutraya   represents three principal sources    of informational 
stress constantly bombarding an organism and resulting in stress and disease. This 
phenomenon simultaneously brings about biological morbidity, e.g.,  Agnibala 
Vaisamya  ,  Ojabala Vaisamya  , and  Sroto   distortion, which forms the basic matrix of 
pathology of all diseases according to Ayurveda. 
 Environmental and life-style factors also bring about behavioral changes in 
different individuals, of course depending to some extent on an individual ʼs 
 Prakriti.   Clearly, the mental state and behavior of individuals greatly reﬂ  ects the 
type of food they consume and the kind of habitat they live in. The  Sattvika  , 
 Rajas  , and  Tama  s food and life style overtly manifest    in an individual. Ayurveda 
rightly proclaims that people and their behavior are the products of their food and 
life styles [ 13 ].  
2.10     Conclusions 
 Ayurveda, despite being one of the oldest systems of life science and health care, 
possesses a fairly well-developed knowledge base on food science with a range of 
hitherto unknown dimensions of food science on the one hand and a number of 
other unique principles and practices on the other, which, if combined with today’s 
nutrition biology   , could provide signiﬁ  cant beneﬁ  ts to contemporary food science 
and nutrition [ 14 ]. A pronature approach, holistic considerations,    and personal-
ized dietary planning constitute the basic features of the Ayurvedic conception of 
dietetics and nutrition, features that are sorely lacking in modern approaches to 
nutrition [ 15 ] .      R.H. Singh
23
   References 
    1.   Sharma PV (ed) Caraka (700BC) Caraka Samhita. Chaukhamba Orientalia Varanasi  
    2.   Singhal GD et al (eds) Susruta (600BC) Susruta Samhita. Chaukhamba surabharati, Varanasi      3.    Singh RH (2005) The holistic principles of ayurvedic medicine. Chaukhamba surabharati, 
New Delhi  
    4.    Singh RH (2007) Kayachikitsa, chapter 12, vol 1. Chaukhamba surabharati, Varanasi, pp 
406–423  
    5.    Singh RH (2004) Swasthavritta vijnana, chapter 7. Chaukhamba surabharati, Varanasi, pp 
120–138  
    6.    Singh RH (2009) Body-mind-spirit integrative medicine. Chaukhamba surabharati, Varanasi      7.   Singh RH (2009) Srotovijnan of Ayurveda. In: Proceedings of 1st international congress of 
Ayurveda, Ayurveda Point, Milan, 21–22 Mar 2009  
    8.    Singh RH (2009) Development of research methodology in Ayurveda. In: Mehta PM (ed) 
Memorial oration. GAU, Jamnagar  
    9.    Valiathan MS (2007) The legacy of susruta, chapters 18–20. Orient Longman, Chennai, pp 
84–87  
    10.   Singh RH (2009) The basic tenets of Ayurvedic dietetics. In: 11th international symposium on 
Ayurveda. The European Academy of Ayurveda, Birstein  
     11.    Lurie DI (2012) Ayurveda and pharmacogenomics, guest editorial. Ann Ayurvedic Med 
1(4):126–128  
    12.    Basisht GK (2011) Symbio health – need of the hour. AYU 32(1):6–11      13.    Singh RH (2009) Exploring quantum logic in Ayurveda. Ayu Int 30(4):360–368      14.    Singh RH (2012) Trends of integrative practice of Ayurvedic medicine. Editorial. Ann 
Ayurvedic Med 1(4):123–125  
    15.    Singh RH (2007) Panchkarma therapy. Chaukhamba Samskrit series, Varanasi    2 The Basic Tenets of Ayurvedic Dietetics and Nutrition
25 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_3, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20143.1            Introduction 
 Biological food is a new subject of discussion among nutritionist globally. It is 
being widely covered by media and has been taken up as a new avenue of com-merce. This puts a very logical question before us that is the biological food can make us healthy or we need healthy eating habits to remain healthy? 
 Ayurvedic science has been very concerned with food and its role in maintaining 
health and in treating diseases since before the emergence of modern medicine. The approach of Ayurveda to analyzing food substances is unique. It not only discusses healthy food items but also speciﬁ  es habits and ways of eating because the last two 
also promote general well-being. Food, according to Ayurveda, is classiﬁ  ed into 
categories like consistency, taste, properties, quality, compatibility, and incompati-bility. Ayurvedic physicians practice with a thorough understanding of the sources, classiﬁ  cation, nutritional merits, adverse effects, and therapeutic indications of food. 
 Substances that constitute food and drugs, living or nonliving, evolved from the 
same ﬁ  ve elements. Ayurvedic theory strongly asserts that the universe is made up 
of ﬁ ve fundamental elements: prithvi (solid), ap (liquid), tejus (ﬁ  re), vayu (gas), and 
akasha (space). Whatever we ﬁ  nd in the universe is a combination of these ﬁ  ve ele-
ments. The human body is also essentially a combination of these ﬁ  ve elements. 
The food available in the universe is also a combination of the ﬁ  ve elements, with a 
predominance of one or another of them. 
 Diet is an important controlling factor with regard to indigenous microbiotic 
activities. The gut microﬂ  ora contains pathogenic, benign, and beneﬁ  cial microbial 
species. A predominance of the former can lead to gut upset, which can be both     Chapter 3   
 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its 
Implications for the Modern World 
             Syal     Kumar    
        S.   Kumar      ( *) 
  Chair of Complementary and Integrative Medicine, Department of Traditional Indian Medicine- Ayurveda , 
 University of Duisburg-Essen ,   Am Deimelsberg 34a ,  Essen   45276 ,  Germany    e-mail: s.kumar@kliniken-essen-mitte.de  
26
acute (e.g., gastroenteritis) and chronic (e.g., inﬂ  ammatory bowel disease). Foods, 
that pass through or get close to the gut    affect the composition of activities aimed at 
achieving a more positive metabolism [ 1 ].  
3.2     Food and Its Healing Process 
3.2.1     Food Consistency 
 In Ayurvedic medicine, food is classiﬁ  ed according to the mode of intake as 
Ashitam (wholesome foods), Peetam (beverages), Leedham (linctus), and 
Khaditam (masticables) [ 2 ]. Each intake method may have its own effects on food 
based on the mechanism of intake and subsequent production of enzymes. Food 
that is heavy needs to be chewed well in the mouth   . This not only breaks the food 
down into small particles but also helps in combining the particles with digestive 
enzymes like linguale lipase, amylase, musin, and others produced by the salivary 
glands. Thus, here, digestion starts from the mouth itself. If not enough enzymes 
are combined with such food items, this may lead to indigestion. Indigestion is the 
major cause of Ama. To avoid such a complication, it is always recommended to 
consume heavy and sweet foods initially to ensure their digestion by a sufﬁ  cient 
amount of enzymes. Light food can be ingested later because it may not require 
many digestive enzymes.  
3.2.2     Classiﬁ  cation of Food 
 The following table gives a detailed explanation of the varieties of food classiﬁ  ed 
according to Ayurveda.
 Sanskrit name  Common name  Examples 
 Sukadhanya  Husked grains  Varieties of rice and wheat 
 Samidhanya  Pulses  Green gram, black gram, sesame, etc. 
 Mamsa  Meats  Prasaha (animals that are aggressive around food)   : 
cow, goat, horse, etc. 
 Bhumisaya (living in burrows): python, mongoose, etc. 
 Anupamruga (living in marshes): boar, rhinoceros, etc. 
 Varisaya (water dwelling): ﬁ  sh, crab, tortoise, 
crocodile, etc. 
 Ambucari (moving on water): swan, crane, duck, etc. 
 Jangalamruga (jungle dweling): deer, wild goat, hare, etc. 
 Lavadya (scattering grain while eating): quail, partridge, 
pheasant, etc. 
 Vartakadi (gallinaceous): peacock, bustard, etc. 
 Pratuda (eating while pecking): pigeon, parrot 
(continued)S. Kumar
27
 Sanskrit name  Common name  Examples 
 Saka  Vegetables  Stems, tubers, leaves, ﬂ  owers, all legumes, etc. 
 Phala  Fruits  Grapes, mangoose   , coconut, etc.  Harita  Greens  Ginger, garlic, coriander, radish  Madhya  Fermented drinks  Grape, sugarcane, wine, vinegar, etc.  Jala  Water  Rain, river, sea, etc.  Gorasa  Milk and milk 
products  Milk of various animals, curd, ghee, etc. 
 Ikshu  Sugar  Sugarcane juice, jaggery, sugar, honey, etc. 
 Sneha  Fat  Oils, ghee, animal fat and marrow  Kritanna  Liquid, semiliquid, 
solid  Gruel, soup, boiled rice, preparations of grain, meat, 
ﬂ our, etc. 
 Aharayoga  Food additives  Oils, pepper, asafoetida, salts, etc. 
   From the preceding classiﬁ  cation it is very clear that the Ayurvedic diet is not 
vegetarian. It clearly speciﬁ  es the importance of meat and its types. It promotes a 
balanced diet of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats from all sources.  
3.2.3     The Role of Taste in Ayurveda 
 According to Indian medicine, tastes inﬂ  uence the human body and mind. The six 
known tastes are madhura (sweet), amla (sour), lavana (salty), katu (pungent), tikta (bitter), and kashaya (astringent). Most food items will be a mixture of these or be dominated by one. The taste that is dominant will be easily detected by the tongue and will be the primary taste (rasa); other tastes that are latent will be secondary (anurasa). 
 The three humors of Ayurveda – Vata, Pitta, and Kapha – which are derived from 
speciﬁ  c combinations of ﬁ  ve elements, are also affected by the six tastes. The inﬂ  u-
ence of the ﬁ  ve elements in food items is proportional to the inﬂ  uence of the ﬁ  ve 
elements of the particular region. For example, fruits or vegetables growing in spe-ciﬁ c area rich in certain elements will also be rich in that corresponding element. An 
apple growing in a water-element-dominated area will also be dominated by the water element. This kind of speciﬁ  c combination of ﬁ  ve elements accounts for 
tastes and their intensity. Being dominated by an element does not mean that the particular item looks like the element; rather, it is dominated by the qualities and functions of that element. 
 A basic concept in pathology is that a person addicted or prone to seeking out 
speciﬁ  c tastes will take on the qualities of these elements in his or her body, which 
will cause in imbalance in the corresponding Dosha, further leading to diseases sup-ported by this particular Dosha. Diabetes, hyperlipidemia, duodenal and gastric ulcers, and others are some of the diseases caused by the improper consumption of tastes. (continued)3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
28
 The six tastes are derived from the special combination of the ﬁ  ve elements. The 
effects of taste on the body depend on the constituent elements that dominate them. The following table gives an overview of the tastes, ﬁ  ve elements present in them, 
and their action on Doshas.
    (a)    Action of individual tastes    
 Tastes  Elements  Action 
on Dosha  General action  Diseases 
 MADHURA 
(sweet)  Solid + liquid  Vata ↓  Builds tissues, prolongs 
life span; good for skin, hair, and throat. Lubricant, cold and heavy; nourishes and stimulates healing  Obesity, excessive sleep, 
cough, fever, eye diseases, excessive mucus production  Pitta ↓ 
 Kapha ↑ 
 AMLA (sour)  Solid + heat  Vata ↓  Appetiser, light, hot, and 
lubricant; induces salivation, energizes the body, strengthens sense organs, stimulates mind, increases peristaltic movement  Promotes thirst, 
sensitivity in teeth, blood disorders, burning sensation; generates heat in muscles, suppuration in wounds  Pitta ↑ 
 Kapha ↑ 
 L AVA NA  
(salt)  Liquid + Heat  Vata ↓  Improves appetite and 
digestion, removes stiffness, acts as laxative, opens channels  Vitiates blood, causes 
skin diseases, internal bleeding, inﬂ  amma-
tion, impotency, wrinkles in skin, gray hair, baldness  Pitta ↑ 
 Kapha ↑ 
 KATU 
(pungent)  Air + heat  Vata ↑  Clariﬁ  es sense organs; 
reduces obesity, blocks channels, promotes appetite and sweating; acts against itching and microorganisms  Causes burning 
sensation, impotency, giddiness, thirst, pain, tremors  Pitta ↑ 
 Kapha ↓ 
 TIKTA (bitter)  Air + space  Vata ↑  Improves digestion, 
reduces both fat and muscles if taken in excess     Causes dryness of mouth 
and skin, reduces tissues, obstructs channels, leads to emaciation and psychic disorders  Pitta ↓ 
 Kapha ↓ 
 KASHAYA 
(astringent)  Air + solid  Vata ↑  Qualities like moping, 
restraining, compressing, roughness  Causes problems with 
normal speaking   ,  
ﬂ atulence, blackish 
discoloration, obstruction of feces, urine, ﬂ  atus, semen, 
spasms, convulsions  Pitta ↓ 
 Kapha ↓ S. Kumar
29
     (b)    Postdigestive taste    
  After ingestion, foods with different tastes combine with acids and digestive 
enzymes. Following this interaction, some tastes transform into another taste, which 
is known as Vipaka. The following table shows the transformation of tastes after 
digestion.
 Taste  Changes  Taste after Digestion 
 MADHURA    (sweet)  No change  MADHURA (sweet) 
 AMLA (sour)  No change  AMLA (sour) 
 LA V ANA (salt)  Change  MADHURA (sweet) 
 KATU (pungent)  No change  KATU (pungent) 
 TIKTA (bitter)  Change  KATU (pungent) 
 KASHAYA (astringent)  Change  KATU (pungent) 
   Food that is converted into a speciﬁ  c taste after digestion will inﬂ  uence the 
Dosha. A person suffering from inﬂ  ammatory hemorrhoids or intestinal ulcers who 
ingests a bitter taste will make the condition worse because of the postdigestive 
effect. Following digestion bitter changes to pungent, adding a burning sensation, 
bleeding, and inﬂ  ammation to the aforementioned conditions.   
3.3     Food and Its Properties 
 Each food has its own speciﬁ  c properties that facilitate the food’s action. The prop-
erties and qualities of food items inﬂ  uence the individual Dosha that makes them 
balanced or unbalanced. The 20 properties give food its individual qualities. These 
properties are taken into account when giving advice to patients. The properties are 
mentioned in the following table [ 3 ].
 Properties  Action  Properties  Action 
 Cold (Sita)  Pleasing to mind; relieves 
fainting, thirst, sweating, and 
heartburn; causes congestion 
and blocks channels  Hot (Ushna)  Improves digestion 
 Lubricant 
(Snigdha)  Promotes lubrication, softness; 
improves strength and 
complexion  Rough (Ruksha)  Causes dryness 
 Slimy (Picchila)  Strengthens, promotes healing 
and union, increases kapha  Nonslimy 
(Visada)  Absorbs moisture 
 Sharp (Tikshna)  Induces burning sensation, 
inﬂ ammation with discharge  Mild/soft 
(Mrudu)  Promotes softness on 
body 
 Heavy (Guru)  Promotes weight, strength  Light (Laghu)  Promotes lightness 
on body 
 Liquid (Drava)  Moistening  Solid (Sandra)  Hardening 
 Smooth 
(Slakshna)  Smoothening  Rough 
(Karkasha)  Causes roughness on 
body 
(continued)3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
30
 Properties  Action  Properties  Action 
 Fragrant 
(Sugandha)  Pleasing, appealing, ﬁ  ne  Foul smell 
(Durgandha)  Unpleasant feeling 
 Instantly 
absorbable (Vyavayi)  Quickly absorbing and digested 
in body  Relaxant (Vikasi)  Muscle relaxant 
 Fast acting 
(Asukari)  Fast radiating, acts quickly  Subtle (Sukshma)  Very small in size; 
can pass through minute channels    
3.4        Food and Its Qualities 
 The seven major dhatus    (tissues) are the end product of the food we eat. Our food 
metabolic system facilitates the proper conversion of food   . The ﬁ  rst digestion activ-
ity is activated in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) with the help of Jatharagni, which is directly supported by the Dosha-Pachaka Pitta   . Jatharagni refers to all the enzyme activity in the GIT that aids in the digestion of food. The digestion of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats is activated by the Jatharagni. Bhootagni is the second metabolic system that helps to digest food at the molecular level (bhoota). The ﬁ  re element 
helps in the digestion of micromolecules of food substances. This helps in the proper absorption of particles for microcirculation. The ﬁ  nal metabolic function 
occurs at the tissue/cellular level with the help of dhatwagni. The conversion of transported food particles in the tissues is accomplished by the dhatwagni. Dhatwagni is the metabolic function in tissues and is responsible for anabolic and catabolic activity. All three of the aforementioned functions of digestion facilitate the proper digestion, absorption, and assimilation of food. But certain factors disturb these processes of digestion. In this regard, quality of food plays a major role. Fresh, warm, and properly prepared food helps to regulate the digestive process. 
 Food stored in freezers    and rewarmed is unhealthy. Freezing changes the quality 
of food and may promote Ama in the body when consumed. Ama, according to Ayurveda, refers to the toxic substances produced in the intestine or in tissues due to improper food or due to weak metabolic activity. Later Ama gets absorbed    into the system, developing a very pathophysiological process    in the body, leading to chronic and immunosuppressive diseases.  
3.5     Compatibility and Incompatibility (Virudhahara) 
 All particles in the universe are made up of ﬁ  ve elements, with one or another pre-
dominating. For this reason, substances (Dravya) are also dominated by one of the elements. The same holds true in the case of food or dietary substances. (continued)S. Kumar
31
A special combination of the ﬁ  ve elements in food substances accounts for their 
normal functioning in the body. Combining foods that should not be consumed at 
the same time will become harmful to the body due to molecular interactions, lead-
ing to indigestion and eventual production of Ama. Virudha means anything that 
aggravates the Dosha   s but does not expel them from the body [ 4 ]. 
 Foods and their combinations that interrupt    the metabolism of tissues, inhibit the 
process of tissue formation, and have properties that are opposite those of tissues are 
called Virudhahara [ 5 ]. 
 Charaka has classiﬁ  ed foods that are incompatible with the body    according to its 
cause and origin. They are explained in the table below    [ 6 ].
 Types of incompatibility 
 Desha virudha  Food that grows in one place will not be suitable for an individual living in 
another region, e.g., consumption of dry and sharp substances in dry areas, 
Unctuous    and cold food in marshy areas 
 Kala virudha  Food consumed contrary to the climate and season, e.g., The context is 
discussing about incompatible food. These foods are incompatible during 
summer and winter    
 Agni virudha  Food that affects the agni, e.g., consumption of heavy food when the power of 
digestion is mild   , light food when digestion is strong 
 Matra virudha  Food that acts as a toxin when combined in varying quantities, e.g., honey and 
ghee in equal amounts 
 Satmya 
virudha  Foods that are contrary to one’s daily diet regimen, e.g., sweet and cold food by 
someone accustomed to hot and spicy    substances 
 Dosha virudha  Food that is contrary to the Dosha involved 
 Sanskar 
virudha  Improper mode of preparation, e.g., baked instead of cooked 
 Veerya virudha  Combination of different veerya food items, e.g., mixing of cold potency food 
   with warm 
 Koshta virudha  Food that is contrary to an individual’s intestinal nature, e.g., food with a 
laxative effect in a person with loose stools 
 Avastha 
virudha  Food that is contrary to a particular state of health, e.g., consumption of 
Vata-aggravating food after physical exercise and exertion 
 Krama virudha  Food that is consumed in the wrong order, e.g., before emptying waste 
materials, when one is not hungry, or after the onset of hunger 
 Parihara 
virudha  Food that is contrary to a disease pathology, e.g., cold foods following 
consumption of ghee 
 Upachara 
virudha  Food combination that is not suitable during particular treatments, e.g., heavy 
food during panchakarma treatments 
 Paaka virudha  Food that should not be combined during cooking/improper method of cooking, 
e.g., undercooked, overcooked, burned during cooking 
 Samyoga 
virudha  Improper combination of food items, e.g., sour substances with milk 
 Hridaya 
virudha  Foods that do not taste good or are not pleasant to the taste 
 Sampada 
virudha  Food that is of poor quality, e.g., not ripened, putreﬁ  ed 
 Vidhi virudha  Food that goes against the rules of proper eating, e.g., eating in open, public 
places 3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
32
   The consumption of incompatible foods is a major cause of many illnesses. 
Modern food culture involves many combinations of such foods. Some basic incom-patible foods are given below.
•    The meat of animals of marshy regions is incompatible with Masha (black gram), 
Ksaudra (honey), Kshira (milk), Virudhaka (germinated grains), and Guda (jag-gery). Uncooked meat with bile is not advisable. The meat of crane with wine is not healthy, and when fried with the fat of boar it is very toxic. The meat of black partridge, peacock, iguana lizard, and common quail processed with castor oil is not good for you.  
•   Fish eaten with milk and milk products causes the production of toxins. All sour 
substances are incompatible with milk and milk products. Consumption of milk and milk products after eating leafy vegetables should be avoided. One should avoid eating meat with milk or milk products.  
•   Ghee kept for more than 10 days in a bronze vessel   .  •   Milk pudding or sweet pudding should not be consumed with sweet liquor or 
with rice and green gram.  
•   Mixture of equal quantities of honey, ghee, muscle fat, oil, and water in the com-
bination of two or three of all is incompatible   .  
•   Drinks followed by a solution of corn ﬂ  our should be avoided. Mustard oil is 
incompatible with curcuma.    
 Incompatible food to which one has become accustomed and that is consumed in 
very small quantities does not produce disease, although it is incompatible with someone who exercises, eats fatty foods, has a strong digestive power, is an adult, or is strong. 
 Unhealthy things (foods, drinks, activities) that one has become used to from 
long use should be discontinued gradually. Similarly, healthy things should be adopted gradually with intervals of 1, 2, or 3 days. Discontinuing unhealthy things and indulging in healthy things will suddenly create diseases of the satmya (habit-ual) and asatmya (nonhabitual).  
3.6     General Dietary Guidelines 
 Type of food  For whom and when 
 Cold food articles 
and drinks  Those suffering from heat, thirst, liquor, intoxication, burning sensation, 
internal bleeding, poisoning, and fainting 
 Hot food  Sufferers from the vitiation of kapha and vata; following poor vakarma 
and panchakarma; dry body    
 Oily food  Those with Vata problems, rough body   , overindulgence in physical or 
sexual activity 
 Rough food  Those who are obese, have excess kapha in their body, have prameha 
(diabetes) 
 Liquid diet  Those who are emaciated, weak, or thirsty 
(continued)S. Kumar
33
 Type of food  For whom and when 
 Dry food  Those with ﬂ  uid accumulation in their body, wounds, prameha 
(diabetes) 
 Food consumed    
once in a day  To enhance digestive power    
 Mixed with drug  Patients who dislike taking drugs 
 Small in quantities     Those who have weak digestion, various disorders  Foods containing 
all tastes  Consuming all tastes helps to maintain the body and to keep healthy    
3.7        Method of Food Preparation 
 Different methods exist for preparing food. They include boiling, frying, extracting, 
fermenting, ﬂ  avoring, pickling, and concentrating. The idea of cooking in India 
developed thousands of years ago under the inﬂ  uence of Ayurveda. The basic idea 
of cooking was not only to make food tastier but also to convert raw food into an acceptable form for the srotus (microchannels) so that it could be transported to various parts of the body. It is fascinating to see how this process works. The hard materials of our body, like, for example, bones, are developed from soft and ﬂ  uid 
food substances absorbed from the intestine. This absorption takes place following digestion and assimilation. The Jataragni, Bhootagni, and Dhatvagni    in our bodies play a major role in this process. 
 The aforementioned methods of food preparation help make different varieties of 
food palatable to our system. For example, Here it is advised to cook the rice. Not good when baked or fried   . Vegetables can be cooked or baked. Those that are cooked are easy to digest. Light vegetables can be baked or steamed   . Thus, the cooking methods mentioned previously help in the proper processing of the different variet-ies of food.  
3.8     General Concept of Dining in Ayurveda 
3.8.1     Food Eaten at the Right Time and in the Proper Manner 
    One should try to relax and sit comfortably while eating. It is not good to keep the 
urine, stool etc.    while eating. One should eat at a moderate pace, not too slow or fast. Do not eat if previously eaten food has not yet been digested. Eating small and large portions at irregular intervals disturbs digestion. After eating it is better to move around a bit instead of going straight to bed. This helps to activate enzymes, thereby aiding digestion. (continued)3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
34
 Breakfast, lunch, and dinner are the major meals. Of these, lunch can be quanti-
tatively large compared to dinner, which should be light. During noon hour   , our system is active and produces more enzymes in the stomach and intestine, which activates metabolism. According to Ayurvedic principles, the pachaka pitta is active at noon due to the inﬂ  uence of the Sun. This makes the pitta stronger and helps 
speed up digestion. After a long and hectic day at work, the body is weak and diges-tive enzymes ﬂ  ow slower into the intestine, even though one might feel hungry. Due 
to modern work schedules, many people eat their big meal of the day in the evening, which is unhealthy due to the aforementioned factors. As a general rule, half portion the stomach can be consumed with solid food, a quarter with liquid food and the remaining quarter can be keep empty for good digestion.  
3.8.2     Concentration and Time-Consuming Meals 
 One should focus on ones meal while eating   , which helps to know the character of the food using the sense organs. Understanding the consistency, smell, and taste of the food one is eating helps in the production of particular enzymes in the stomach and intestines. Receptors in the sense organs help to transmit signals to the brain, which further stimulates the ﬂ  ow of particular enzymes into the stomach and intes-
tines. According to Ayurveda, all three Doshas help in the metabolic process. Jataragni or pachaka pitta is what digests food in the stomach and intestines and refers to the total action of digestive acids and enzymes. The grahani (pylorus) is the organ that holds food for a certain time inside the stomach to facilitate digestion. The strength of the grahani and agni is depended each other   . Digestion begins in the mouth and is completed only when the waste materials are expelled. 
 Food ingested at the proper time is taken into the alimentary tract with the help 
of Pranavata and mass of food    and are Liquid/Fluid in the stomach. This is produced by the help of Kledaka Kapha. Then the Jataragni activated by the samanavata cooks the food. During digestion, food ﬁ  rst becomes sweet and produces kapha and then 
becomes sour and gives rise to pitta. Thereafter it is transported into the large intes-tine    and becomes solid and pungent and gives rise to vata. This process is called avastha paka. 
 The ﬁ  ve characters of agni, bhouma, apya, agneya, vayavya, and nabhasa cook 
the ﬁ ve fundamental qualities within food. This is called nishtapaka. After diges-
tion, each quality nourishes the equivalent qualities in the body. 
 The inﬂ  uence of emotions and activities on digestion is not only mentioned in 
Ayurveda. The results of recent studies in modern medicine support the concept of digestion discussed in Ayurveda. Brain–gut interactions are increasingly being rec-ognized as underlying the pathomechanisms of functional gastrointestinal disor-ders. Bidirectional communication between the central nervous system (CNS) and the enteric nervous system (ENS) occurs in both health and disease. Various CNS and gut-directed stressors stimulate the brain–gut axis. Processes modulating responsiveness to stressors along the brain–gut axis involve neural pathways and S. Kumar
35
immunological and endocrinological mechanisms. Disturbances at any level of 
|neural control of the gastrointestinal tract can affect modulation of gastrointestinal 
motility, secretion, immune functions, and perception and emotional responses to 
visceral events. ENS function, central processing, and autonomic regulation play an 
important role in the brain–gut dialog. Stress and emotions may trigger neuroim-
mune and neuroendocrine reactions via the brain–gut axis. Various non-site-speciﬁ  c 
neurotransmitters inﬂ  uence gastrointestinal, endocrine, and immune functions, as 
well as human behavior and emotional states, depending on their location. The 
physiology of the digestive tract and the subjective experience of symptoms, health 
behavior, and treatment outcomes are strongly affected by psychosocial factors [ 7 ].  
3.8.3     Fresh Food 
 Consumption of fresh food is highly recommended in Ayurveda. Foods that are 
stale need many enzymes to be digested. For this reason, the chances of getting Ama 
   is high. Reheating of food and oils create more oxidation and produces free radicles 
due to oxidative stress. When fatty acids are exposed to oxygen in the presence of 
heat or light, oxidative rancidity occurs, causing the formation of hydroperoxide 
compounds. These compounds further lead to the production of aldehydes [ 8 ].
Oxygenated aldehydes are toxic and cause oxidative stress in cells, which increases 
the risk of degenerative and atherosclerotic diseases. Lipid oxidation is caused by 
unsaturated fatty acids rather than saturated ones, which in turn are a good source of 
free radicals    [ 9 ].  
3.8.4     Too Much Raw Food 
 There is a general concept in the West that raw food is a good source of vitamins. 
When food is cooked, many valuable vitamins and minerals are destroyed. 
According to Ayurveda, metabolic activity in the body is individualized. The three 
agni – jataragni, bhootagni, and dhatwagni – constitute one’s metabolic framework. 
Based on the three agni strength the food ingested is    digested, absorbed, and assimi-
lated. Any abnormalities in any of the three levels of agni functioning will impair 
the metabolic process. In this situation, even if you eat food rich in vitamins or 
minerals, it will not be converted into nutrients   ; instead, it remains a metabolic 
waste product, which Ayurveda calls Ama. To digest a raw substance, one should 
have good digestive power (agni). For this reason, cooking is very important because 
it facilitates the digestion, absorption, and assimilation of food. Even if the vitamin 
content is lower, it is completely absorbed into the system. For this reason Ayurveda 
insists on eating warm, cooked food. Such food is easy to digest and helps in secret-
ing enzymes into the stomach and intestine, thereby creating good metabolism. 3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
36
 Raw food is sheeta veerya (cold potency) and generates cold in the system, 
thereby suppressing enzyme functions in the stomach. Cold substances always try 
to contract the pores through which enzymes leak into the gastrointestinal tract. For 
this reason raw food is not often digested completely and leads to the production of 
metabolic toxins.  
3.8.5     Fast Foods 
 Due to modern life styles, people run out of time, even for eating. Thus, people eat 
fast food because it can be bought and eaten quickly. Deep frying of potatoes can 
produce toxins called acrylamide, which is carcinogenic [ 10 ]. One study found that 
the toxin 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE) was higher in deep-fried foods. When 
fruits or vegetables are boiled in oil for frying, the oil molecules that penetrate into 
the fried food are converted into similar molecules like HNE. Once the food is cooled 
to room temperature, it is converted into toxic HNE    [ 8 ]. HNE causes a variety of 
cytotoxic and genotoxic effects [ 11 ]. It causes metabolic inhibition    and thiol oxida-
tion and generates proarrhythmic changes in cellular excitability [ 12 ]. Fast foods also 
cause the production of free radicals. Free radicals can interact with almost all bio-
molecules in different ways, altering their natural properties and making them more 
susceptible to damage. Such oxidative damage affects almost all components of the 
cellular machinery such as carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Both 
the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the end products of their reaction with various 
biomolecules can cause DNA damage by altering its nitrogenous bases [ 13 ,  14 ]. 
 All the factors discussed previously cause the production of Ama immediately or 
in the long run. Ama has a broader meaning than indigestion. It affects the three 
metabolic processes of digestion, absorption, and assimilation. Ama disturbs the 
three agni – jataragni, bhootagni, and dhatwagni. Abnormal indigestion and intoler-
ances produce a wide range of gut and systemic symptoms, including gas, stomach 
pain, diarrhea or constipation, severe headaches, severe fatigue, loss of cognitive 
functions such as concentration, memory, and reasoning, muscle and joint pain, 
heart palpitations, and a variety of allergies [ 15 – 17 ]. 
 These can be explained by the production of toxic metabolites from gut bacteria 
as a result of anaerobic digestion of carbohydrates and other foods not absorbed in 
the small intestine. These metabolites include alcohols, diols such as butan 2,3 diol, 
ketones, acids, and aldehydes such as methylglyoxal [ 18 ,  19 ]. These toxins induce 
calcium signals in bacteria and affect their growth, thereby acting to modify the bal-
ance of microﬂ  ora in the gut [ 20 – 22 ]. 
 The idea that toxins are the cause of many diseases was proposed over 100 years 
ago by one of the founders of immunology – Elie Metchnikoff (1845–1916), work-
ing at Institut Pasteur in Paris. Metchnikoff won the Nobel Prize in 1908 for his 
discovery of macrophages. But his real focus was on the role of gut bacteria in dis-
ease. He wrote in his book  The Nature of Man  , which represented a Darwinian S. Kumar
37
approach to the human body, “The large intestine must be regarded as one of the 
organs possessed by man and yet harmful to his health and his life. The large intes-
tine is the reservoir of the waste of the digestive processes, and this waste stagnates 
long enough to putrefy. Bacterial putrefaction is the cause of all disease.” Metchnikoff 
published several papers investigating the effects of putative bacterial toxins such as 
cresol on health and survival [ 23 ].   
3.9     Conclusions 
 Ayurveda addresses not only how to treat disease but also how to prevent it. In both 
cases, diet plays a major role. Speciﬁ  c diets are recommended based on an indi-
vidual’s heath status. The diet concept in Ayurveda, which refers to diet concept in 
Ayurveda,    is still important in the modern world. The Ayurvedic concept of incom-
patible foods and the concept of eating, when integrated with modern life, help to 
resolve many health issues. The aim of an individual diet plan in Ayurveda is to help 
the body to have a balanced metabolism. India, where Ayurveda originated, is a land 
of spices. From northern to southern India varieties of spices can be found depend-
ing on the climate and geographical features. Cooking with spices according to 
one’s metabolic activity helps the individual to stabilize the Doshas. 
 Western society is slowly realizing the inﬂ  uence of food on the body. People 
have become aware of the importance of eating healthy food versus fast food. The 
proliferation of, for example, bio food markets, bio restaurants   , and vegetarian res-
taurants organic concern towards food is positive   . The use of spices and consump-
tion of various herbal teas are becoming more widespread. Many research studies 
have been conducted to understand the effects of food and spices in, for example, 
diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, cancer, metabolic diseases, and autoimmune 
diseases. All these developments show that people are starting to care about their 
stomach and, hence, their body, mind, and soul.     
      References 
    1.       Gibson GR (2008) Prebiotics as gut microﬂ  ora management tools. J Clin Gastroenterol 
42(Supp 2):S75–S79  
    2.      (1985) Charaka Samhitha, vimanasthana 2/15, 2nd edn. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁ  ce, 
Varanasi  
    3.   (2010) Sushrutha Samhitha sutrasthana 46/514–524, reprint edn. Chaukhanbha orientalia, 
Varanasi  
    4.   (1992) Charaka Samhitha sutrasthana, 26/85, 3rd edn. Chaukhamba sanskrit series, Varanasi  
    5.      Sabnis M (2013) Virudhahara: acritical view. Ayu 33(3):332  
    6.   (1992) Charaka Samhitha sutrasthana, 26/86–101, 3rd edn. Chaukhamba sanskrit series, 
Varanasi  
    7.    Mulak A, Bonaz B (2004) Irritable bowel syndrome: a model of the brain-gut interactions. 
Med Sci Monit 10(4):RA55–RA62  3 The Concept of Diet in Ayurveda and Its Implications for the Modern World
38
     8.   Sabnis M (2013) Virudhahara: acritical view. Ayu 33(3):334  
    9.    Wasowicz E, Gramza A, Hes M, Jelen HH, Korczak J et al (2004) Oxidation of lipids in food. 
Pol J Food Nutr Sci 13:87–100  
    10.    Tareke E, Rydberg P, Karlsson P et al (2000) Acrylamide: a cooking carcinogen? Chem Res 
Toxicol 13:517–522  
    11.    Esterbauer H et al (1991) Chemistry and biochemistry of 4-hydroxynonenal, malonaldehyde 
and related aldehydes. Free Radic Biol Med 11:81–128  
    12.    Bhatnagar A (1995) Electrophysiological effects of 4-hydroxynonenal, an aldehydic product 
of lipid peroxidation, on isolation rat ventricular myocytes. Circ Res 76:293–304  
    13.    Valko M, Izakovic M, Mazur M, Rhodes CJ, Telser J (2004) Role of oxygen radicals in DNA 
damage and cancer incidence. Mol Cell Biochem 266:37–56  
    14.    Valko M, Leibfritz D, Moncol J, Cronin MT, Mazur M, Telser J (2007) Free radicals and anti-
oxidants in normal physiological functions and human disease. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 39:44–84  
    15.    Matthews SB, Campbell AK (2000) When sugar is not so sweet. Lancet 355:1330–11330     16.    Matthews SB, Waud JP, Roberts AG, Campbell AK (2005) Systemic lactose intolerance: a new 
perspective on an old problem. Postgrad Med J 81:167–173  
    17.    Waud JP, Matthews SB, Campbell AK (2008) Measurement of breath hydrogen and methane, 
together with lactase genotype, deﬁ  nes the current best practice for investigation of lactose 
sensitivity. Ann Clin Biochem 45:50–58  
    18.    Campbell AK, Waud JP, Matthews SB (2005) The molecular basis of lactose intolerance. Sci 
Prog 88:157–202  
    19.    Campbell AK, Waud JP, Matthews SB (2009) The molecular basis of lactose in tolerance. Sci 
Prog 92:241–287  
    20.    Campbell AK, Wann KT, Matthews SB (2004) Lactose causes heart arrhythmia in the water 
ﬂ ea  Daphnia pulex  . Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 139:225–234  
   21.    Campbell AK, Naseem R, Holland IB, Matthews SB, Wann KT (2007) Methylglyoxal and 
other carbohydrate metabolites induce lanthanum-sensitive Ca2+ transients and inhibit growth in  E. coli  . Arch Biochem Biophys 468:107–113  
    22.    Campbell AK, Naseem R, Wann K, Holland IB, Matthews SB (2007) Fermentation product 
butane 2,3-diol induces Ca2+ transients in  E. coli   through activation of lanthanum-sensitive 
Ca2+ channels. Cell Calcium 41:97–106  
    23.    Campbell AK, Matthews SB, Vassel N et al (2010) Bacterial metabolic ‘toxins’: a new mecha-
nism for lactose and food intolerance, and irritable bowel syndrome. Toxicology 278:268–276    S. Kumar
39 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_4, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20144.1            Introduction 
 Conventional nutrition science focuses mainly upon the qualitative and quantitative 
aspects of food and their application in reference to the physiological needs of recipients on the basis of generic classiﬁ  cations like age and gender or physiological 
needs during some physiologically demanding or pathological events of life (e.g., pregnancy or lactation). In contrast to this, Ayurveda places a profound stress on the integrated relationship between food, its recipient, and the ambience for its con-tributory role in determining the net out come of the food consumed   . Ayurveda perceives the dynamism of the food–consumer–environment matrix and proposes a perfect balance among them to derive maximum beneﬁ  ts from the food consumed. 
 It is for this reason, in addition to the type, quality, and quantity of food, that 
Ayurveda further recommend a perfect mental attitude and ambience when one sits down to eat. An ideal state of mind is considered essential to make one fully recep-tive to all the beneﬁ  ts of the food to be consumed. This code of eating, which is 
aptly called  asta aahara vidhi vesheshayatana   (eight principles of food consump-
tion), is the foremost principle of Ayurveda and sets forth the ideal conditions to make most efﬁ  cient use of food as a health promoter. Like many other principles of 
Ayurveda which had been deciphered for their soundness on scientiﬁ  c ground   , the 
principles of eating in Ayurveda have also been found to be based on sound logic and scientiﬁ  c reasoning. Replicating the work done elsewhere by other researchers, 
it can easily be asserted that these principles of eating of Ayurveda are not only sound scientiﬁ  cally but also have tremendous applicability as a preventive health 
care measure to avert the many adverse outcomes of an unhealthy food–body–mind–environment interaction.      Chapter 4   
 Applying Ayurvedic Eating Principles 
to the Science of Stress-Linked Food Behavior 
             Sanjeev     Rastogi    
        S.   Rastogi      ( *) 
  PG Department of Kaya Chikitsa ,  State Ayurvedic College ,     Lucknow,     India    e-mail: rastogisanjeev@rediffmail.com  
40
4.2     Stress and Its Link to Diseases 
 Stress has long been linked with many unhealthy outcomes, including chronic 
degenerative and noncommunicable diseases like cancer, diabetes, and hyperten-
sion. A large body of scientiﬁ  c evidence exists establishing the role of stress in 
altering cellular mechanisms leading to erratic regulation of corresponding sets of 
genes causing disease. Psychological stress is found to play an immunosuppressive 
role that gradually weakens a body's defenses, thereby rendering the body vulnera-
ble to many diseases. The ﬁ  rst evidence of this weakened defense came from 
reduced leukocyte count in response to psychological stress to the body. Recently, 
activation of a stress gene, ATF3, was found to be associated with metastatic spread 
of breast cancer. ATF3 was proposed to be the crucial link between stress and can-
cer, playing a decisive role in its metastasis. Stress is already known as a risk factor 
for cancer. It is also known that ATF3 is activated and expressed in response to 
stressful conditions. Under typical circumstances, activation of ATF3 can actually 
cause normal and benign cells to undergo apoptosis. It has been suggested that can-
cer cells somehow escape immune-system cells that have been recruited to the site 
of a tumor to express ATF3. Eventually, ATF3 spurs the immune cells to act errati-
cally and give cancer an escape route from a tumor to other areas of the body. In 
animals lacking ATF3 genes, a metastasis was found to be less signiﬁ  cant compared 
to those having an ATF3 system. 
 ATF3 is a master switch type of gene: its gene product, the ATF3 protein, turns 
other genes on and off. There are many ways to activate ATF3 in cells, and stress 
signals sent out by cancer cells represent just one method of expressing this gene in 
immune-system cells and producing a chronic would-healing response. Other meth-
ods include radiation, chemotherapeutic agents, a high-fat diet, UV damage, and 
even chronic behavioral stress [ 1 ]. 
 Psychological stress is associated with greater risk for depression, heart disease, 
and infectious diseases. Chronic psychological stress has been associated with 
erratic inﬂ  ammatory responses. Prolonged stress alters the effectiveness of cortisol 
in regulating inﬂ  ammatory responses because it decreases tissue sensitivity to this 
hormone. Speciﬁ  cally, immune cells become insensitive to cortisol's regulatory 
effect. Considering the common cold as a key example of stress reactions, the study 
suggested that cold symptoms could be more intense in people who are chronically 
stressed because of their increased level of cortisol and subsequently increased 
inﬂ ammatory response [ 2 ]. 
 Inﬂ ammation is also a common link among various pathologies. Studies show 
how various dietary components can modulate key pathways to inﬂ  ammation, 
including sympathetic activity, oxidative stress, transcription factor nuclear factor 
kappa B (NF- κB) activation, and proinﬂ  ammatory cytokine production. Behavioral 
studies have demonstrated that stressful events can inﬂ  uence inﬂ  ammation through 
the same processes. Therefore the combined contributions of diet and behavior to 
inﬂ ammation are certainly important. There are several far more intriguing interac-
tive possible links between stress and disease and food choice. For example, stress S. Rastogi
41
inﬂ uences food choices; it also enhances maladaptive metabolic responses to 
unhealthy meals, and food can impact mood as well as proinﬂ  ammatory responses 
to stressors. Furthermore, for vagal innervations of the digestive system its stimula-
tion can inﬂ  uence    metabolic responses to food and inﬂ  ammation. Both depression 
and stress have documented negative effects on vagal activation. As one example, 
omega-3 fatty acid intake can boost mood and vagal tone, dampen NF- κB activation 
and responses to endotoxin, and modulate the magnitude of inﬂ  ammatory responses 
to stressors. It has been proposed that a better understanding of how stressors, nega-
tive emotions, and unhealthy meals work together to enhance inﬂ  ammation would 
beneﬁ  t behavioral and nutritional research for its better applicability to human 
health [ 3 ].  
4.3     Stress and Its Link to Food Behavior 
 It was long been debated whether stress caused immediate or long-term changes in 
food choices. As an initial proposal, it was suggested that the stressed and subse-
quently emotional eater usually craved energy-rich food compared to nonemotional 
eaters who do not have any such preference   . It was also presumed that such prefer-
ences were more common in females than males, who are less labile emotionally. 
Oliver et al. [ 1 ] explored the issue of whether acute stress caused immediate changes 
in food choices or eating behavior. Their study conﬁ  rmed the hypothesis that stress 
plays a key role in determining food preferences and this preference is marked by 
increased consumption    of sweet and fatty foods during stressful periods. The study 
further proposed that stress may actually compromise the health of susceptible indi-
viduals through deleterious changes in food choices [ 4 ]. Stress inﬂ  uences human 
eating behavior in two ways, resulting in over- or undereating depending on the type 
and severity of the stressor. Chronic life stress seems to be associated with a greater 
preference for energy-rich foods that are high in sugar and fat. Longitudinal studies 
suggest that chronic life stress may be causally linked to weight gain, which is more 
visible in men. Stress-induced eating, however, may be one factor contributing to 
the development of obesity. Future studies with a measure of biological markers of 
stress can help us to understand the physiological mechanism underlying the stress–
eating relationship and to know how stress might be linked to neurotransmitters and 
hormones responsible for satiety [ 5 ]. 
 The mechanism through which emotions might affect food-related behavior is 
still poorly understood. It is hypothesized that eating patterns are directly related to 
a compensatory mechanism in response to emotional trauma. In one study aiming 
to identify the relationship between emotions and food-related behavior, negative 
emotions were induced and consumption of comfort food and noncomfort food was 
measured by means of taste tests. Emotion induction was preceded by measuring 
individual differences in emotion regulation strategies or by instructions to regulate 
emotions in either an adaptive (reappraisal) or maladaptive (suppression) manner. 
Relative to reappraisal and spontaneous expression, suppression led to increased 4 Applying Ayurvedic Eating Principles to the Science of Stress-Linked Food Behavior
42
food intake, but only of comfort foods. Emotions themselves were not found to be 
directly responsible for the eating behavior; rather, the eating behavior was caused 
by the mechanism through which the emotions were handled [ 6 ]. 
 Two more studies investigated the stress–eating relationship. The ﬁ  rst examined 
self-reported changes in intake of snack foods, while the second investigated stress- 
induced overconsumption in a laboratory setting comparing high-fat (HF) and low- 
fat (LF) snacks. The study was conducted using the Dutch Eating Behaviour 
Questionnaire (DEBQ) [ 7 ] and with a self-reported measure designed to evaluate 
changes in eating in response to stress. Increased intake of HF snacks was associ-
ated with high emotional eating but not with restraint. A laboratory-based experi-
ment compared intake of HF and LF snacks after ego-threatening tasks. Intake was 
suppressed by 31.8 % in restrained compared to unrestrained eaters across the tasks. 
Restrained eaters consumed signiﬁ  cantly less following the ego threat. These results 
suggest that the type and variety of foods offered affect the link between stress and 
eating in laboratory settings. Further research could explore these ﬁ  ndings and 
examine their application to clinical practice in reference to stress-related eating [ 8 ]. 
 There are a few known predictors of stress-induced eating. It is, however, not 
known whether a few physiological and psychological variables are related to eat-
ing following a stressful event. A high cortisol reactivity in response to stress is 
often hypothesized as being linked with eating after stress, given the relations 
between cortisol and both psychological stress and mechanisms affecting hunger. In 
one study this hypothesis was tested by exposing 59 healthy premenopausal women 
to both a stress session and a control session on different days. The study suggested 
that high cortisol reactors consumed more calories on the stress days compared to 
low reactors. Both groups ate similar amounts on the control day. High reactors also 
differed signiﬁ  cantly in their food choice and preferred sweet food throughout the 
day. These results suggest that psychophysiological response to stress may inﬂ  u-
ence eating behavior and could eventually affect both weight and health [ 9 ]. 
 Certain foods might be more frequently eaten during stressful periods. It is not 
known whether poor nutritional habits are associated with stress and depression 
symptoms or whether such relationships differ by country and gender. One recent 
study examined this in a sample from three European countries during a Cross- 
National Student Health Survey. A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 
ﬁ rst-year students in Germany ( N  = 696), Poland ( N  = 489), and Bulgaria ( N  = 654). 
Self-administered questionnaires included a 12-item food frequency questionnaire, 
Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale, and a modiﬁ  ed Beck Depression Index. Linear 
regression analyses were conducted for two outcomes, perceived stress and depres-
sion symptoms. The study suggested that food consumption frequencies differ by 
country and gender, as did depression symptoms and perceived stress. For male 
students, none of the food consumption groups was associated with perceived stress 
or depression symptoms. In females, perceived stress was associated with more 
frequent consumption of sweets/fast foods and less frequent consumption of fruits/
vegetables. Additionally, depression symptoms were associated with less frequent 
consumption of fruits/vegetables and meat. The study suggests the existence of con-
sistent associations between unhealthy food consumption and depression symptoms S. Rastogi
43
and perceived stress among female students from three European countries, but not 
among male students. The study therefore suggests that efforts to reduce depression 
symptoms and stress may also lead to the consumption of healthier foods or vice 
versa [ 10 ].  
4.4     Ayurvedic Approaches to Food Consumption 
 Besides the composition of a given food in reference to its quality, Ayurveda further 
proposes certain attributes related to food and to the method of eating it that ulti-
mately yield the optimal beneﬁ  ts of the food consumed. Following are the speciﬁ  c 
eating principles recommended in Ayurveda. 
 Warm food ( Ushana  ); food with a suﬁ  cient quantity of fat ( Snigdha  ); food in 
quantities suited to an individual's need ( Matravata  ); food consumption only after 
previously eaten food is digested ( Jeerne  ); compatible food ( Viryaviruddha  ); con-
sumption of food in an appropriate place ( Ishte deshe  ); consumption of food con-
taining all the material needed    ( Ishta sarvopakaranam  ); moderate eating pace ( Nati 
drutam  ); not slow eating    ( Nati vilambit  ); eating without talking ( Ajalpana  ); eating 
without laughing ( Ahasan  ); focusing on food while eating ( Tanmana Bhunjeet  ); 
eating in accordance with one’s own choice and requirements ( Atmanambhisamikshya 
samyaka  ). It would be worthwhile here to examine these Ayurvedic principles of 
eating in reference to current knowledge about stress, food- related behavior, and 
their connection to disease   . 
4.4.1     Consumption of Food in Appropriate Place ( Ishte Deshe  ) 
 This aspect of Ayurvedic eating is particularly relevant in the current sense. Ishte 
deshe means taking food in a place that is appropriate for dining. From an Ayurvedic 
perspective, this should be a place near the kitchen where the food can be served 
warm. Unfortunately, in the modern world   , food consumption has divergent presen-
tations and ranges from street food at one extreme and upscale dining on the other. 
Workplace stress often does not allow us to sit comfortably to eat; this is also true 
during social gatherings where food is served in a buffet manner. In both such situ-
ations, the body is not allowed to become completely immersed in the eating experi-
ence, and hence the quantity of food consumed and even food preferences are often 
misappropriated. During social gatherings, food consumption often depends upon 
the ambience and upon the choice of the food available. As shown by recent studies, 
under stressful conditions, food choices are often shifted toward energy- and fat-
rich foods, and this often happens in social gatherings. It is not surprising that peo-
ple who often attend such gatherings also frequently suffer from problems related to 
inappropriateness of food consumption.  4 Applying Ayurvedic Eating Principles to the Science of Stress-Linked Food Behavior
44
4.4.2     Consumption of Food with All the Accessories 
( Ishta Sarvopakaranam  ) 
  Ishta sarvopakaranam   refers to the availability of every thing required    while eating. 
It may be related to the desired food items or the utensils needed to consume the food. Typical examples of such accessories are chopsticks or forks for food like pasta or noodles or spoons with liquid foods like soup. In the absence of such acces-sories, the consumer may be stressed and thus unable to consume the food in an appropriate manner. Eventually, this might lead to stress-related reactions at the time of food consumption. Some accessory foods like pickles, spices, salads, water, and soup also add to net food consumption. In the absence of such accessories, food cannot be enjoyed properly.  
4.4.3     Moderate Eating Pace ( Nati Drutam  ) and Eating 
Without Delay ( Nati Vilambit  ) 
  Nati drutam   is the Ayurvedic principle of avoiding stressful eating. Food should be 
consumed neither too quickly nor too slowly. Fast or delayed food consumption may be reﬂ  ective of a stress-related food consumption behavior where the time 
taken to eat the food may reﬂ  ect the type and intensity of the stress stimulus. Usually 
in chronic and sustained stressful conditions, food consumption may be quickened, whereas in acute stressful conditions it may be delayed. A thorough scientiﬁ  c study 
would further elaborate the harmful effects of a delayed or quickened eating behav-ior on overall health.  
4.4.4     Eating Without Talking ( Ajalpana  ) or Laughing 
( Ahasana  ) 
 Talking and laughing during the act of food consumption may also be reﬂ  ective of 
a person's anxious state. Besides the immediate physiological effects caused by improper placement of food particles, talking and laughing can also affect digestion by diverting attention away from the food and its consumption. A lack of attention to food consumption may lead to the consumption of an inappropriate quantity of food or of poor-quality food.  S. Rastogi
45
4.4.5     Focusing on Food While Eating ( Tanmana Bhunjeet  ) 
 Focusing while eating on the food one is consuming is one of the most important 
components of Ayurvedic principles related to eating behavior. Good concentration ensures that the food will be enjoyed completely and the body will be fully aware of food choices and quantity in accordance with one’s own needs. Clearly, good con-centration on food can only be assured when the person is in a stable frame of mind and a good mood.  
4.4.6     Eating According to One’s Own Preferences 
and Requirements ( Atmanambhisamikshya Samyaka  ) 
    This is the ﬁ  nal principle of eating behavior, and it calls for individual vigilance 
toward what is being eaten and in what quantity. Of the many different kinds of food to choose from, clearly different people will have different preferences. This indi-vidual food choice may be reﬂ  ective of personal choice, individual constitution 
( prakriti  ), or a  dosha   imbalance in the body. The body craves what is lacking inside.   
4.5     Conclusions 
 Ayurveda has elaborate principles with regard to eating. Recent scientiﬁ  c research 
in the ﬁ  eld has shown that stress is one of the most signiﬁ  cant factors leading to 
disease and signiﬁ  cant changes in eating behavior. It is proposed that a change in 
eating behavior    due to stress may be the primary cause of pathologies related to stress. Identifying this factor early on, Ayurveda recommended guidelines related to ambience and mental attitude during food intake. This recommendation of Ayurveda stem from the simple recognition that stress may lead to various ailments, and because a pathology often begins with subtle changes    in eating behavior, careful attention to the circumstances in which one consumes food may be the best way to prevent pathologies from occurring at all.     
   References 
     1.    Wolford CC, McConoughey SJ, Jalgaonkar SP, Leon M, Merchant AS, Dominick JL, Yin X, 
Chang Y , Zmuda EJ, O’Toole SA, Millar EKA, Roller SL, Shapiro CL, Ostrowski MC, Sutherland RL, Hai T (2013) Transcription factor ATF3 links host adaptive response to breast cancer metastasis. J Clin Invest 123(7):2893  4 Applying Ayurvedic Eating Principles to the Science of Stress-Linked Food Behavior
46
    2.    Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Doyle WJ, Miller GE, Frank E, Rabin BS, Turner RB (2012) 
Chronic stress, glucocorticoid receptor resistance, inﬂ  ammation, and disease risk. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. doi:  10.1073/pnas.1118355109      
    3.    Janice K (2010) Kiecolt-Glaser, stress, food, and Inﬂ  ammation: psychoneuroimmunology and 
nutrition at the cutting edge. Psychosom Med 72(4):365–369  
    4.    Oliver G, Wardle J, Gibson EL (2000) Stress and food choice: a laboratory study. Psychosom 
Med 62:853–865  
    5.    Torres S, Nowson C (2007) Relationship between stress, eating behavior and obesity. Nutrition 
23(11–12):887–894  
    6.    Evers C, Marijn Stok F, de Ridder DTD (2010) Feeding your feelings: emotion regulation 
strategies and emotional eating. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 36:792  
    7.    Van Strien T, Fritjers JER, Bergers GPA, Defares PB (1986) Dutch eating behaviour question-
naire for assessment of restrained, emotional and external eating behaviour. Int J Eat Disord 
5:295–315  
    8.       Wallis DJ, Hetherington MM (2009) Emotions and eating. Self-reported and experimentally 
induced changes in food intake under stress. Appetite 52:355–362  
    9.    Epel E, Lapidus R, McEwen B, Brownell K (2001) Stress may add bite to appetite in women: 
a laboratory study of stress-induced cortisol and eating behavior. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
26:37–49  
    10.       Mikolajczyk RT, El Ansari W, Maxwell AE (2009) Food consumption frequency and per-
ceived stress and depressive symptoms among students in three European countries. Nutr J 
8:31    S. Rastogi
   Part II 
   Integrated Food Science 
and its Clinical Application        
49 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20145.1            Introduction 
 Since the dawn of agriculture nearly 10,000 years ago, profound environmental 
changes have affected our diet and lifestyles. This has led to a mismatch between 
our ancient genetic endowments and contemporary lifestyle patterns, including diet 
and exercise, resulting in the emergence of noncommunicable chronic lifestyle- 
related degenerative diseases such as cancer and diabetes. 
 Approximately 2 million years ago, the foraging diet of our hunter-gatherer 
ancestors consisted of meat, ﬁ  sh, nuts, and roots – all of which were secured with 
enormous physical effort requiring the expenditure of over 3,000 cal/day [ 1 ]. The 
subsequent domestication of plants and animals led to the development of agricul-
tural societies. Former hunter-gatherers became agriculturalists who toiled in the 
ﬁ elds expending approximately 2,800 cal/day while consuming a spectrum of foods 
such as whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products. Despite the sporadic 
availability of food, our Paleolithic ancestors’ survival for reproduction was ensured 
and supported by an efﬁ  cient thrifty gene. Additionally, the extremely active agricul-
tural lifestyle, coupled with a shorter life span, was successful at keeping nutrition- 
related chronic degenerative diseases of the present day at bay. However, in the last 
250 years, industrialization, coupled with globalized food production, processing, 
and retailing, has transformed the modern food environment in terms of both the 
quantity and quality of food available. Contrary to the vagaries of the Paleolithic 
food supply, we currently enjoy a plethora of fresh, processed, convenience, and 
functional foods fortiﬁ  ed or enriched with nutrients suited to a variety of palates and 
needs throughout the year. Despite this picture of plenty, unlike our Paleolithic 
ancestors, we continue to experience three insurmountable challenges. First, our     Chapter 5   
 Integrating the Science and Art 
of Using Food as Medicine 
             Sudha     Raj     
        S.   Raj        ( *) 
  David B Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics, Department of Public Health, 
Food Studies and Nutrition ,  Syracuse University ,   Syracuse ,  NY  ,  USA   
 e-mail: sraj@syr.edu  
50
dietary intakes are not in keeping with nutritional recommendations. A large propor tion 
of present-day diets consists of high-glycemic-index foods that are low in ﬁ  ber and 
high in salt, sugars, and oils [ 2 ]. For example, the ﬁ  ber intake of hunter-gatherers was 
40–100 g/day, whereas our current intakes are in the 15–20 g/day range [ 1 ]. Second, 
the ability to balance our caloric intakes with caloric expenditure is challenged by 
modern lifestyle patterns and a preponderance of sedentary activities of daily living 
[ 3 ]. Third, our genetic endowments are struggling to keep pace with the rapidity of 
our lifestyle changes that we continue to experience in the form of metabolic disor-
ders, degenerative diseases, and their associated comorbidities [ 4 ,  5 ].  
5.2     Diet and Lifestyle Interventions 
 Several etiological factors exert an inﬂ  uence either individually or in combination 
to fuel the current global pandemic of chronic diseases. For instance, the globaliza-
tion of the industrialized food supply has resulted in altered, acculturated, and 
imbalanced dietary patterns in developed [ 6 ] and developing economies referred to 
as nutrition transition [ 7 – 9 ]. Other fueling factors include physical activity patterns 
that are not keeping pace with caloric intakes, food bioactive-gene interactions, epi-
genetic mechanisms that underlie fetal programming of chronic diseases, proin-
ﬂ ammatory states arising from increased oxidative stress caused by environmental 
toxicity [ 10 ,  11 ], an imbalanced gut microbiome [ 12 ], chronic stress, and hectic 
lifestyles [ 13 ]. Health disparities stemming from rising healthcare costs, an increas-
ing life span, ethnic diversity, inequitable access to adequate healthcare, and changes 
in sociocultural factors such as family dynamics further exacerbate the situation. 
 Conventional biomedicine, with its arsenal of pharmaceutical drugs, vaccines, 
antibiotics, and medical technology, is crucial in acute crisis situations. However, its 
specialized nature, dualistic approach of categorizing mind and body as separate 
entities, and consideration of nutrition as an ancillary component are viewed as 
limited in addressing chronic disease that is multifactorial in origin [ 14 ]. This has 
spurred a growing realization that perhaps the solution to this conundrum is to focus 
on the whole patient in the context of his or her biopsychosociocultural uniqueness 
[ 15 ]. Identifying the root causes that initiate and perpetuate chronic diseases in indi-
viduals is of greater relevance than comparing individuals to a set of preestablished 
laboratory criteria. Consequently, individualized assessment, diagnosis, and treat-
ment using tailored interventions to address underlying causes, such as the food we 
eat in an environment that fosters a positive patient–provider relationship, are at the 
foundation of patient-centered medicine. Newer medical paradigms, such as inte-
grative [ 16 ,  17 ] and functional medicine [ 18 ], encourage this practice of patient- centered 
medicine. Health and disease are viewed as existing on a continuum; consequently, 
a multipronged, holistic interventional approach that integrates multiple modalities 
is encouraged. Advocating a whole-foods approach using food as medicine, physi-
cal activity, stress, and lifestyle management, along with conventional biomedicine 
where necessary, is at the heart of these paradigms. Such salutogenic strategies are S. Raj
51
believed to empower patients and play a pivotal role in moving the individual toward 
positive health and vitality, even in the face of signiﬁ  cant disease pathology [ 19 ]. 
 Ancient healing systems, such as Ayurveda and traditional Chinese medicine, 
have focused on salutogenesis with an eye toward making an impact on future gen-
erations [ 20 ]. Emphasis is on the regulation of a healthy lifestyle by conscious or 
mindful interactions with all aspects of the environment, including food and its 
quality and quantity to prevent the development of disease and maintain wellness. 
Wholesome food “Ahar   ” and practices to enhance its assimilation and utilization in 
the body are integral to these systems. Speciﬁ  c criteria are established for the types 
and amounts of food to be consumed based on seasonality and body constitutional 
assessment with the objective of maintaining balance or homeostasis. The modern- 
day practice of integrative nutrition builds on these principles using a three-pronged 
approach that (a) evaluates the impact of the individual’s genetic makeup on (b) 
nutrient adequacy and availability so that (c) targeted food-based interventions can 
be designed as the ﬁ  rst line of defense. 
5.2.1     Genetic Uniqueness 
 First, the individual’s biochemical uniqueness is taken into consideration to opti-
mize health and wellness through food [ 21 ]. A wealth of information generated in 
the “omic” science, such as nutrigenomics, nutrigenetics, proteomics, metabolo-
mics, and transcriptomics, continues to indicate that individuals and populations 
exhibit wide variations in the inherited genome ranging from single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) to genomic mutations [ 22 ]. These variations contribute to 
a spectrum of disorders, from inborn errors of metabolism and monogenic condi-
tions to polygenic diseases such as diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Food con-
taining bioactives (e.g., nutrients, nonnutrient phytochemicals, antioxidants, and 
toxins) acts as an informational molecule. Bioactives contained in foods are inﬂ  u-
enced by plant varietals, availability, and dietary choices and sociocultural, eco-
nomic, and geographical factors; they directly or indirectly impact transcription 
and translation of critical proteins such as enzymes, hormones, and transporters 
that function in metabolic pathways. Genomic variations, such as mutations and 
SNPs, inﬂ  uence nutrient bioavailability, utilization, and physiological processes, 
resulting in altered nutrient requirements [ 23 ]. This combination of variability in 
an individual’s genetic predisposition and consumption as inﬂ  uenced by dietary 
choices can positively or negatively inﬂ  uence health outcomes, for example, mal-
nutrition or optimal nutrition, which in turn affects genomic expression and stabil-
ity. An emerging understanding of these factors begs the challenge of matching 
the nutriome (nutrient intake combinations) to optimize an individual’s wellness 
potential based on genetic status, life stage, and environmental circumstances 
[ 24 ]. Further, diet, independently or in combination with other factors such as 
stress or environmental exposures, can cause heritable and programmable, yet 
modiﬁ  able, extragenomic, epigenetic changes via mechanisms such as DNA 5 Integrating the Science and Art of Using Food as Medicine
52
methylation and histone modiﬁ  cation [ 25 ]. Over a lifetime these changes, inﬂ  u-
enced by nutrient availability, modify DNA without altering the DNA sequence, 
also known as metabolic imprinting [ 26 ]. For instance, nutrients such as folate, 
vitamin B12, vitamin B6, choline, and methionine participate in the 1-carbon 
metabolic pathway; their role is critical in ensuring an adequate supply of methyl 
groups for methylation processes. Dietary factors can also modify the use of 
methyl groups, inﬂ  uencing methylation enzyme activity [ 27 ]. However, the extent 
of this inﬂ  uence is determined by factors such as bioavailability and differential 
rates of absorption and excretion. Bioactive food components that have the capa-
bility of modulating the epigenetic machinery include polyphenols, selenium, 
retinoids, essential fatty acids, allyl compounds, isothiocyanates, and short-chain 
fatty acids such as butyrates [ 28 ,  29 ]. Research initiatives have focused and con-
tinue to focus on the identiﬁ  cation and use of dietary factors such as genistein in 
soy, hesperidin in citrus fruits, isothiocyanates in cruciferous vegetables, and res-
veratrol in grapes, to name a few. These products have been studied for their abili-
ties to function as methylation modulators and regulators of epigenetic events 
[ 30 ]. Depending on the gene, timing of expression, and tissue, DNA hypo- or 
hypermethylation can silence or activate critical genes, contributing to inﬂ  amma-
tory disease states, including cancer. The spectrum of chronic disease phenotypes 
that we see today is described as the result of the lifelong remodeling of our epig-
enome. Although much remains to be elucidated about the interrelationships 
between epigenetic, genetic, and environmental interactions and their translation 
into practical applications, current research initiatives focus on modulating the 
epigenetic mechanisms of key inﬂ  ammatory genes using dietary strategies as one 
approach to handle the chronic disease epidemic [ 28 ].  
5.2.2     Multifunctional Nutrients and Bioactives in Foods 
 Second, long-latency nutrient deﬁ  ciencies or insufﬁ  ciencies due to a lack of or 
less-than- optimal availability for meeting an individual’s needs are believed to 
play a major role in chronic disease etiology. As multitasking molecules, nutrients 
have one or more necessary and purposeful coenzyme and cofactor roles in cel-
lular metabolism, making them critical to the functioning of biochemical path-
ways. Dietary choices, genetic predispositions, stress, environmental exposures, 
gut health, and synergistic or antagonistic interactions with other nutrients are 
important determinants that inﬂ  uence nutrient bioavailability. Biochemical path-
ways are often the ﬁ  rst to be affected; the binding afﬁ  nities of required enzymes 
for coenzymes and cofactors adjust accordingly, resulting in varying degrees of 
metabolic impairments, with the accumulation of intermediary metabolites or 
products that can be evaluated by appropriate biomarkers [ 31 ]. For example, the 
functionality of the endogenous antioxidant enzyme glutathione reductase can be 
completely or partially compromised in frank or suboptimal riboﬂ  avin deﬁ  ciency, 
resulting in decreased detoxiﬁ  cation capacity. DNA damage, digestive and S. Raj
53
detoxiﬁ  cation imbalances, inﬂ  ammatory responses, hormonal changes, or free 
radical production often ensues. Over time, such cellular and functional changes 
resulting from long-latency nutritional deﬁ  ciencies or insufﬁ  ciencies result in a 
myriad of core imbalances in various organ systems manifesting as signs and 
symptoms of chronic diseases [ 14 ]. The triage theory introduced by Bruce Ames 
posits that under conditions of micronutrient scarcity, multitasking nutrients pri-
oritize their roles to ensure short-term survival processes at the expense of long-
term health [ 32 ]. For example, vitamin K is a multitasking nutrient with roles in 
the blood coagulation cascade as well as in the skeletal system. Under conditions 
of a limited supply of vitamin K, its blood coagulation functions take precedence 
over its contribution to skeletal health [ 33 ]. 
 While nutrient deﬁ  ciency and its consequences are a well-recognized phenome-
non that can be mitigated by nutrient supplementation, the question remains as to 
the generalized efﬁ  cacy of such strategies. For example, large-scale randomized 
control trials on the impact of, for example, B-carotene on cancer [ 34 ], vitamin E on 
LDL oxidation [ 35 ], and homocysteine levels on the risk of CHD [ 36 ] have shown 
limited beneﬁ  ts. Supplemental folic acid has been shown to be of some value in 
preventing cancer at an early stage but promoting cancer at a later stage [ 37 ]. All of 
this research has underscored the importance of taking a holistic approach to the 
study of food and its impact on human nutrition. Food is more than a collection of 
isolated nutrients; therefore, the true impact of nutrients is best studied not in isola-
tion but rather in their natural environment – the whole food.  
5.2.3     Food as Medicine for Health and Wellness 
 Third, nutrition, as determined by food components, is an environmental input that 
is critically involved in the creation and mitigation of disease primarily by disrupt-
ing or restoring balance respectively in cellular mechanisms and physiological pro-
cesses. Food, in the integrative and functional medicine paradigm, is seen not 
merely as a source of calories and nutrients but as a messenger molecule inﬂ  uencing 
homeostasis. Cell signaling, production and regulation of growth factors, cytokines, 
and eicosanoids are critical factors modulated by bioactives in foods we choose to 
consume [ 38 ]. These processes occur in a milieu inﬂ  uenced by genetic predisposi-
tions and environmental and lifestyle factors such as exercise, sleep, and toxic expo-
sures. In essence, the choices we make every day about what we eat dictate what and 
who we are. On the one hand, unhealthy food choices and dietary behaviors, disre-
gard for food sensitivities, and increasing toxic loads can contribute to the develop-
ment of chronic diseases such as, for example, metabolic syndrome, asthma, and 
migraines. On the other hand, when we mindfully apply the current science of food 
and its components, we can use the restorative and therapeutic capacities of food to 
our health advantage. So how does food exert its therapeutic potential? 
 Food synergy is an approach that looks at all food components within a “whole” 
unprocessed food rather than using a reductionist approach of isolating a single 5 Integrating the Science and Art of Using Food as Medicine
54
food component with a unique beneﬁ  t [ 39 ]. This holistic, whole-food thinking of 
food ﬁ  rst is in contrast with the research activities of the last century where the 
focus was on the discovery and application of single nutrient components as con-
centrated supplements and their role in combating nutrient deﬁ  ciencies [ 40 ]. The 
premise of food synergy is that the action of the whole food matrix (the composite 
of naturally occurring food components in biological systems) is greater than or 
different from the corresponding actions of individual food components, regardless 
of whether they are isolated from whole foods, e.g., carotene, or produced by tech-
nological processes, e.g., trans-fatty acids. Individual food components consist of 
dietary nutrient and nonnutrient factors, e.g., nutrients such as carbohydrates, essen-
tial fats, phytochemicals, and antioxidants. These compounds are thought to be evo-
lutionarily dependent and bioavailable to act in a well-orchestrated, synergistic 
manner affecting human biological processes [ 41 ,  42 ]. Flavonoids, phenolic com-
pounds, tocopherols, coumarins, tannins, and carotenoids are examples of phyto-
chemicals and antioxidants that, despite their quantitative and qualitative variability, 
originate in the plant kingdom. The combination of compounds within the food 
matrix exhibits their therapeutic potential in an anti-inﬂ  ammatory diet through a 
variety of mechanisms often not demonstrated by isolated food components. These 
include enhanced biotransformation, intracellular signaling for blocking carcino-
genic activity, regulation of transcription factor activity, enhanced DNA repair 
mechanisms, antibacterial or antiviral functions, and modulation of the amount and 
type of eicosanoids produced. 
 Justiﬁ  cation of the food synergy approach is further provided by a growing body 
of in vivo and in vitro evidence that identiﬁ  es synergistic, additive, and antagonistic 
interactions that occur between these food components. For example, green tea 
polyphenols, such as epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechingallate (EGCG), epigallo-
catechin (EGC), and epicatechingallate (ECG), are known to exert a variety of che-
mopreventive effects such as inhibition of malignant cell growth and cell apoptosis 
[ 43 ]. Studies on gastric carcinoma cells indicate that EC by itself has a limited effect 
on cell growth or induction of apoptosis. However, its chemopreventive effects are 
enhanced when EC is combined with the other catechins, showing the beneﬁ  ts of 
whole tea consumption rather than puriﬁ  ed EGCG supplements. Spices such as 
ginger, turmeric, cinnamon, black pepper, garlic, and others that are common ingre-
dients in everyday South Asian cuisine have been described and used for their thera-
peutic potential in the texts of the traditional Indian medical systems of Ayurveda 
and Siddha [ 44 ]. Spices and herbs have been used independently and in various 
combinations in a myriad of food preparations over millennia; their physiological 
impact is being unraveled now [ 45 ]. In addition to enhancing the ﬂ  avor of dishes, 
herbs and spices are excellent sources of bioactives such as curcumin in turmeric, 
piperine in black pepper, and gingerol in ginger. These bioactives exhibit anti- 
inﬂ ammatory, antibacterial, and antithrombotic potential and have the ability to pro-
tect against oxidative damage by inhibiting and addressing free radical damage 
[ 46 ]. There is emerging evidence pointing to the complementary and synergistic 
effects of active ingredients in spices such as curcumin in turmeric and piperine in 
black pepper [ 47 ]. All of this evidence calls attention to the importance of the S. Raj
55
judicious use of these food ingredients in daily food preparations that over a lifetime 
can contribute to optimal health and wellness through beneﬁ  cial and additive thera-
peutic effects. 
 In the last decade the food synergy concept has been extended to analyze global 
dietary patterns and their inﬂ  uence on the risk of chronic diseases [ 48 ]. Dietary pat-
tern analysis, wherein due consideration is given to the types and amounts of foods 
and nutrients and the combinations in which they are consumed based on geograph-
ical, cultural, and socioeconomic factors, is a better predictor of disease risk than 
the study of individual foods, food groups, or isolated nutrients. A signiﬁ  cant 
amount of evidence links the beneﬁ  ts of diets with a whole-food focus. The tradi-
tional Okinawan diet of the southern Japanese Islands [ 49 ], the Mediterranean diet 
[ 50 ], and diets such as the DASH diet with clinical applications [ 51 ] are associated 
with a lowered risk for chronic disease. Despite regional variations, the Mediterranean 
diet emphasizes whole-grain cereals, legumes, and nuts and includes ﬁ  sh, extra vir-
gin oil, and small quantities of red meat. Each of these food components within the 
dietary pattern offers nutritional advantages and disadvantages, such as a lowered 
glycemic load, anti-inﬂ  ammatory components such as ﬁ  ber, lignans, zinc, the B 
vitamins, and vitamin E, saturated fats, and an optimal ratio of omega 6:3 fatty 
acids. Yet, it is the sum total effect of all food components (quantity, quality, addi-
tive, antagonistic, and synergistic effects) and whether they are consumed in bal-
anced amounts exempliﬁ  ed in the food synergy concept that is responsible for 
beneﬁ  cial health outcomes. Despite these advantages, it is important to recognize 
the importance of balance, portion control, and the ill effects of overconsumption, 
reiterating the idea that it is the dose that makes the poison.   
5.3     Conclusions 
 Food is a powerful clinical tool that aids in preventing and treating disease. 
Therefore, the choices we make about what we consume as food will have a bearing 
on our health. The therapeutic potential of food is further enhanced by an adequate 
functioning of the gastrointestinal system characterized by digestive wellness [ 52 ]. 
A corollary requirement is a well-functioning detoxiﬁ  cation system represented by 
the optimal production and functioning of detoxiﬁ  cation enzymes such as those in 
the CYP 450 family [ 53 ]. An integrative whole-food approach recommends a mul-
tipronged strategy aimed at normalizing multiple biological systems. This includes 
a gradual transition to an unprocessed whole-foods diet, paying due attention to the 
source of food, method of preparation, portion control, removing and controlling 
food allergens, recognizing and addressing food sensitivity, reducing the environ-
mental toxic load, and following a holistic lifestyle intervention strategy that com-
bines diet, exercise, stress management, and spirituality.     5 Integrating the Science and Art of Using Food as Medicine
56
   References 
     1.       Aguilera JM (2013) Healthy habits. In: Edible structures. The basic science of what we eat. 
CRC Press/Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, pp 349–365  
    2.    Neustadt J (2006) Western diet and inﬂ  ammation. Integr Med 5(4):14–18  
    3.    Cordain L, Gotshall LW, Boyd Eaton S, Boyd Eaton III S (1998) Physical activity, energy 
expenditure and ﬁ  tness. An evolutionary perspective. Int J Sports Med 19:328–335  
    4.    Eaton SB, Cordain L (1997) Evolutionary aspects of diet: old genes, new fuels. In: Simopoulos 
P (ed) Nutrition and ﬁ  tness: evolutionary aspects, children’s health, programs and policies. 
Karger, Basel, pp 26–37  
    5.    Nesse RM, Williams JC (1998) Evolution and the origins of disease. Sci Am 279(5):86–89  
    6.    Shaw JE, Sicree RA, Zimmet PZ (2010) Global estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 
2010 and 2030. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 87:4–14  
    7.    Popkin BM (2006) Global nutrition dynamics: the world is shifting rapidly toward a diet linked 
with non-communicable diseases. Am J Clin Nutr 84:289–298  
   8.    Delavari M, Sonderlund AL, Swinburn B, Mellor D, Renzaho A (2013) Acculturation and 
obesity among migrant populations in high income countries- a systematic review. BMC 
Public Health 13:458. doi:  10.1186/1471-2458-13-458      
    9.    Hu FB (2011) Globalization of diabetes: the role of diet, lifestyle and genes. Diabetes Care 
34(6):1249–1257. doi:  10.2337/dc11-0442      
    10.    Pruss-Ustun A, Vickers C, Haeﬂ  iger P, Bertollini R (2011) Known and unknowns on burden of 
disease due to chemicals: a systematic review. Environ Health 10:9,   http://www.ehjournal.net/
content/10/1/9      
    11.    Borchers A, Teuber SS, Keen CL, Gershwin ME (2010) Food safety. Clin Rev Allergy 
Immunol 39:95–141. doi:  10.1007/S12016-009-81764      
    12.    Gentschew L, Ferguson LR (2012) Role of nutrition and microbiota in susceptibility to inﬂ  am-
matory diseases. Mol Nutr Food Res 56:524–535  
    13.    Malarkey WB, Jarjoura D, Klatt M (2013) Workplace based mindfulness practice and inﬂ  am-
mation: a randomized trial. Brain Behav Immun 27:145–154,   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbi.2012.10.009      
     14.    Jones DS, Hoffman L, Quinn S (2009) 21st century medicine: a new model for medical educa-
tion and practice. Institute for Functional Medicine, Gig Harbor,   http://www.functionalmedi-
cine.org/ifm_ecommerce/ProductDetails.aspx?ProductID=174      
    15.    di Sarsina PR, Iseppato I (2011) Why we need integrative medicine? EPMA J 2:5–7. 
doi:  10.1007/s13167-011-0065-2      
    16.    Maizes V , Rakel D, Niemiec C (2009) Integrative medicine and patient -centered care. Explore 
5(5):277–289  
    17.      Chang C (2013) Is integrative medicine the next frontier? Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 
44(3):205–7. doi:  10.1007/S12016-012-8313-3      
    18.    Hyman M (2004) Paradigm shift: the end of “normal science” in medicine. Understanding 
function in nutrition, health and disease. Altern Ther 10(5):10–15, 90–94  
    19.    Cloninger CR (2011) Person centered integrative care. J Eval Clin Pract 17:371–372  
    20.       Rastogi S (2009) Ayurveda for comprehensive healthcare. Indian J Med Ethics 6(2):101–2  
    21.    DeBusk R (2010) The role of nutritional genomics in developing an optimal diet for humans. 
Nutr Clin Pract 25(6):627–633  
    22.    Trajillo E, Davis C, Milner J (2006) Nutrigenomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and the prac-
tice of dietetics. J Am Diet Assoc 106:403–413  
    23.       Stover PJ, Caudill M (2008) Genetic and epigenetic contributions to human nutrition and 
health: managing genome-diet interactions. J Am Diet Assoc 108(9):1480–1487  
    24.    Fenech M, El-Sohemy A, Cahill L, Ferguson LR, French TA, Tai ES, Milner J, Koh WP, Xie 
L, Zucker M, Buckley M, Cosgrove L, Lockett T, Fung KY , Head R (2011) Nutrigenetics and 
nutrigenomics: viewpoints on the current status and applications in nutrition research and 
practice. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics 4:69–80  S. Raj
57
    25.    Feinberg AP (2008) Epigenetics at the epicenter of modern medicine. JAMA 299(11):1345–1350. 
doi:  10.1001/jama.299.11.1345      
    26.    Waterland RA, Garza C (1999) Potential mechanisms of metabolic imprinting that lead to 
chronic disease. Am J Clin Nutr 69:179–197  
    27.    SzarcvelSzic K, Ndlovu MN, Haegeman G, VandenBerghe W (2010) Nature or nurture: let 
food be your epigenetic medicine in chronic inﬂ  ammatory disorders. Biochem Pharmacol 
80:1816–1832  
     28.    Belshaw NJ, Johnson IT (2011) Isothiocyanates and polyphenols. In: Niculescu MD, Haggerty 
P (eds) Nutrition in epigenetics. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, pp 263–272  
    29.    Ong TP, Moreno FS, Ross SA (2011) Targeting the epigenome with bioactive food compo-
nents for cancer prevention. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics 4:275–292  
    30.    Verma M (2012) Cancer control and prevention by nutrition and epigenetic approaches. 
Antioxid Redox Signal 17(2):355–364  
    31.    Richard Lord JAB (ed) (2008) Laboratory evaluations for integrative and functional medicine, 
2nd edn. Metametrix Institute, Duluth  
    32.    Ames BN (2010) Optimal micronutrients delay mitochondrial decay and age associated dis-
eases. Mech Ageing Dev 131(7–8):473–479  
    33.    Ames BN (2006) Low micronutrient intake may accelerate the degenerative diseases of aging 
through allocation of scarce micronutrients by triage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(47):
17589–17594  
    34.    Jacobs DR, Tapsell LC, Temple NJ (2011) Food synergy: the key to balancing the nutrition 
research effort. Public Health Rev 33(2):507–529  
    35.    Asmis R, Llorente VC, Gey KF (1995) Prevention of cholesteryl ester accumulation in p388D1 
macrophage like cells by increased cellular vitamin E depends on species of extracellular 
cholesterol. Conventional heterologous non-human cell cultures are poor models of human 
atherosclerotic foam cell formation. Eur J Biochem 233:171–178  
    36.    Albert CM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, Zaharris E, MacFadyen J, Danileson E (2008) Effect of 
folic acid and B vitamins on risk of cardiovascular events and total mortality among women at 
high risk for cardiovascular disease: a randomized trial. JAMA 299:2027–2036  
    37.    Sauer J, Mason JB, Choi Sang-Woon (2009) Too much folate- a risk factor for cancer and 
cardiovascular disease? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 12(1):30–36. doi:  10.1097/MCO.0b0 
13e 32831cec62      
    38.    Wang S, Meckling KA, Marcone MF, Kakuda Y , Tsao R (2011) Synergistic, additive and 
antagonistic effects of food mixtures on total antioxidant capacities. J Agric Food Chem 
59:960–968  
    39.    Jacobs DR et al (2009) Food synergy: an operational concept for understanding nutrition. Am 
J Clin Nutr 89:1543S–1548S  
    40.    Messina M, Lampe JW, Birt DF, Appel LJ, Pivonka E, Berry B, Jacobs DR Jr (2001) 
Reductionism and the narrowing nutrition perspective: time for reevaluation and emphasis on 
food synergy. J Am Diet Assoc 101(12):1416–1419  
    41.    Jacobs DR, Tapsell LC (2007) Food, not nutrients is the fundamental unit in nutrition. Nutr 
Rev 65(10):439–450  
    42.   Jacobs SR, Tapsell LC (2013) Food synergy: the key to a healthy diet. Plenary lecture II con-
ference on “translating nutrition: integrating research, practice and policy”. Proc Nutr Soc 
72:200–206. doi:  10.1017/S0029665112003011      
    43.    Morie N, Hirabayashi N, Takahashi Y , Miyauchi Y , Taguchi H, Takeishi K (2005) Synergistic 
effect of green tea catechins on cell growth and apoptosis induction in gastric carcinoma cells. 
Biol Pharm Bull 28:574–579  
    44.    Govindarajan R, Vijayakumar M, Pushpangadan P (2005) Antioxidant approach to disease 
management and the role of Rasayana herbs of Ayurveda. J Ethnopharmacol 99:165–178  
    45.    Vasanthi HR, Parameswari RP (2010) Indian spices for a healthy heart-an overview. Curr 
Cardiol Rev 6:274–279  
    46.    Jungbauer A, Medjakovic S (2012) Anti-inﬂ  ammatory properties of culinary herbs and spices 
that ameliorate the effects of metabolic syndrome. Maturitas 71:227–239  5 Integrating the Science and Art of Using Food as Medicine
58
    47.    Hlava čková L, Janegová A, Uli čná O, Janega P, Cerná A, Babál P (2011) Spice up the hyper-
tension diet-curcumin and piperine prevent remodeling of aorta in experimental L-NAME 
induced hypertension. Nutr Metab (Lond) 8:72. doi:  10.1186/1743-7075-8-72      
    48.    Hu FB (2002) Dietary pattern analysis: a new direction in nutritional epidemiology. Curr Opin 
Lipidol 13:3–9  
    49.    Mano R, Ishida A, Ohya Y , Todoriki H, Takishita S (2009) Dietary intervention with Okinawan 
vegetables increased circulating endothelial progenitor cells in healthy young women. 
Atherosclerosis 204:544–548  
    50.    Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, Covas MI, Corella D, Arós F, Gómez-Gracia E, Ruiz- 
Gutiérrez V , Fiol M, Lapetra J, Lamuela-Raventos RM, Serra-Majem L, Pintó X, Basora J, 
Muñoz MA, Sorlí JV , Martínez JA, Martínez-González MA (2013) Primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet. N Engl J Med 368(14):1279–1290. 
doi:  10.1056/NEJMoa1200303    , Epub 2013 Feb 25  
    51.    Foroughi M, Akhavanzanjani M, Maghsoudi Z, Ghiasvand R, Khorvash F, Askari G (2013) 
Stroke and nutrition: a review of studies. Int J Prev Med 4(Suppl 2):S165–S179  
    52.    Bosscher D, Breynaert A, Pieters L, Hermans N (2009) Food based strategies to modulate the 
composition of the intestinal microbiota and their associated health effects. J Physiol Pharmacol 
60(Suppl 6):5–11  
    53.    Murray M (2006) Altered CYP, expression and function in response to dietary factors: poten-
tial roles in disease pathogenesis. Curr Drug Metab 7(1):67–81    S. Raj
59 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_6, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20146.1            Introduction 
 The prevalence of chronic noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) is now reaching 
 epidemic proportions in the developing countries [ 1 ]. Indeed, India already has the 
highest number of diabetic and prediabetic patients in the world, reaching 62.4 
 million and 72.7 million, respectively [ 2 ]. A recent study from the Indian Council 
of Medical Research–INdia DIABetes (ICMR– INDIAB) showed that the weighted 
prevalence of diabetes (both known and newly diagnosed) in the urban population 
of Chandigarh (14.2 %) was the highest, followed by Tamil Nadu (13.7 %), 
Jharkhand (13.5 %), and Maharashtra (10.9 %). At every age interval, the preva-
lence of diabetes in urban areas was higher compared with rural areas [ 2 ]. This 
national estimate shows a trend of an increasing number of people with diabetes in 
India over the last decade [ 3 ]. The cause behind the huge epidemic is the alteration 
of dietary patterns with a rise in reﬁ  ned-grain consumption due to growing industri-
alization and the country’s economic conditions. A natural method of precaution 
that entails using functional foods present in foods may be one of the most beneﬁ  -
cial measures in combating the growing epidemic of diabetes.  
6.2     Changing Face of India 
 The evolution of current dietary and food habits of Indians reﬂ  ects the agricultural 
and industrial revolutions of the country. The Bengal famine resulted in an acute 
decline in food production in India. The so-called Green Revolution, in the context     Chapter 6   
 Integrated Food and Nutrition 
in the Management of Diabetes 
             Ruchi     Vaidya    ,     Sudha     Vasudevan    ,     K.     Manobala    ,     R.M.     Anjana    , 
and     V .     Mohan    
        R.   Vaidya        S.   Vasudevan        K.   Manobala        R.M.   Anjana        V .   Mohan      ( *) 
  Madras Diabetes Research Foundation and Dr Mohan’s Diabetes Specialties Centre WHO 
Collaborating Centre for Non Communicable Diseases Prevention & Control ,  IDF Centre 
of Education ,   Gopalapuram ,  Chennai ,  India   
 e-mail: drmohans@diabetes.ind.in  ; www.drmohansdiabetes.com; www.mdrf.in  
60
of agriculture in India, led to record grain output and ensured self-sufﬁ  ciency in 
cereal grains and reduced hunger. The Green Revolution prominently featured 
cereal grains, especially wheat and rice, which resulted in a shift in dietary pat-
terns. Today India suffers from conditions such as “afﬂ  uenza,” which leads to 
excessive food intake, a decrease in physical activity, and urbanization. The prob-
able reasons for the escalation of diabetes in Indians are rapid urbanization, indus-
trialization, and demographic transitions leading to increasing income levels, all of 
which has resulted in altered lifestyles [ 4 ,  5 ]. In addition, migration to urban envi-
ronments from rural settings may also be a major contributor to the epidemic of 
type 2 diabetes in Indians. Obesity, especially central obesity and increased vis-
ceral fat due to physical inactivity, and the consumption of a high-calorie/high-fat 
and high-sugar diets are other major contributing factors [ 6 ]. The results from the 
Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiological Study (CURES) show a high prevalence of 
both general and central obesity, among both men and women, with women having 
slightly higher rates [ 7 ]. 
6.2.1     Reﬁ  ned Grains, Dietary Carbohydrates, 
and Diabetes Risk 
 A population-based, epidemiological cross-sectional study, undertaken to assess the 
dietary patterns of the Chennai population as the urban component of the Chennai 
Urban Rural Epidemiological Study (CURES), shows that carbohydrates were the 
major source of energy (64 % E), followed by fat (24 % E) and protein (12 % E). 
Reﬁ ned cereals contributed to the bulk of the energy (45.8 % E), followed by visible 
fats and oils (12.4 % E) and pulses and legumes (7.8 % E). However, energy supply 
from sugar and sweetened beverages was within the recommended levels of <10 % 
E. Intake of micronutrient-rich foods, such as fruits and vegetables (265 g/day) and 
ﬁ sh and seafood (20 g/day), was far below the FAO/WHO recommendation [ 8 ]. 
 Reﬁ ned grains in southern India mainly consist of polished rice, reﬁ  ned wheat 
ﬂ our (white ﬂ  our), semolina, and ragi (ﬁ  nger millet) ﬂ  our. Of these, white rice, a high 
glycemic index (GI) cereal staple, is the main component of the diet    (76 %, mean 
253 g/day) and represents the major source of energy and contributes up to 66 % of 
the total glycemic load (GL) [GL = GI % x amount of available carbohydrates pro-
vided by the portion of the food eaten] in urban Chennai diets. The commonly con-
sumed highly polished white rice in India has a high GI value (approximately 75–80), 
and the reﬁ  ning process leads to a loss of ﬁ  ber, vitamins, magnesium and other min-
erals, lignans, phytoestrogens, and phytic acid, many of which may be protective 
factors against diabetes and cardio vascular diseases (CVD)   . Research carried out in 
the urban Chennai population showed a higher intake of reﬁ  ned cereals, and a high-
glycemic-load diet was associated with a metabolic syndrome in Asian Indians who 
habitually consume high-carbohydrate diets (Figs.  6.1  and  6.2 ) [ 9 ,  10 ].
    Whole grains like brown rice were reported to have health beneﬁ  ts in reducing 
the risk of chronic diseases like diabetes. Brown rice has intact bran and a germ that R. Vaidya et al.
61
contains micronutrients, phytonutrients, and dietary ﬁ  ber as compared with fully 
polished white rice, as reported by studies conducted in the West [ 11 ]. Many people 
are unaware of the health beneﬁ  ts of brown rice and consider that Kerala red rice, 
parboiled rice, or even hand-pounded rice as brown rice. Hence, in this context   , 
01 23 45 67 8Q1Q2Q3Q4
1 
Reference3.37 
(2.13-5.31)4.33 
(2.72-6.9)7.83
(4.72-12.99)
Odds ratio for metabolic syndromeQuartiles of refined cereal intake (g/d)*p for trend<0.001
*P denotes the trend calculated using the median of each category of intake as 
a continuous variable in the regression model. Adjusted for age, sex, smoking, alcohol,
BMI, METS, total energy, legumes, visible fats and oils, dairy products, sugars, fruits
and vegetables, tubers, fish and seafood, and nuts and oil seeds 
  Fig. 6.1    Relation of reﬁ  ned cereal intake to metabolic syndrome disorders [ 10 ]        
*p for trend<0.00
*Tests for a linear trend were conducted across increasing categories by treating the
medians of intake in categories as a continuous variable. The 95% confidence interval is
in parentheses. The model was adjusted for age, sex, BMI, family history of diabetes,
cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, physical activity, and Income in Indian Rupees 
  Fig. 6.2    Relation of glycemic load to type 2 diabetes [ 9 ]         
 6 Integrated Food and Nutrition in the Management of Diabetes
62
research on people’s awareness of brown rice is being carried out for the ﬁ  rst time 
on Indian foods by determining the GI of foods containing brown rice and compar-
ing them with their white rice counterparts.  
6.2.2     Oil Intake and Metabolic Syndrome 
 Edible oil is an important source of fat in the Indian diet. Besides being a source of 
energy, it adds a special ﬂ  avor and palatability to food. The quality of fat in terms of 
essential fatty acids and the ratio of omega 6:3 are very essential to maintaining 
good health. A community-based study carried out in Chennai showed that almost 
63 % of the Chennai population preferred modern sunﬂ  ower oil and only 7 % pre-
ferred traditional groundnut oil (7 %) and sesame oil (2 %) [ 8 ]. The use of omega-6 
poly unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) PUFA   -rich vegetable oils like sunﬂ  ower/saf-
ﬂ ower oil can aggravate the risk of obesity and its consequences, particularly among 
Asian Indians, who habitually consume a cereal-based diet consisting mainly of 
reﬁ ned grains with low intakes of omega-3 fats [ 12 ]. The use of traditional oils such 
as groundnut/sesame/mustard and even soybean oils or blends of oils seems to be a 
better option because it could ensure an optimal ratio of saturated, monounsatu-
rated, omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids and reduce the risk of metabolic problems, 
a pre-event that leads to diabetes and cardiovascular disorders.  
6.2.3     Functional Foods 
 The erosion of healthy diet as an outcome of modernization and industrialization 
has led to the development of dietary supplements and functional foods. Functional 
foods are foods, including whole foods and fortiﬁ  ed, enriched, or enhanced foods or 
dietary components, that may reduce the risk of chronic disease and provide a health 
and physiological beneﬁ  t beyond the traditional nutrients it contains. Functional 
food is a key concept for the future of nutrition. Some functional foods that play a 
major role in the prevention of chronic diseases and the promotion of health are 
mentioned in what follows.  
6.2.4     Omega-3 Fatty Acids 
 Apart from being a source of energy, fatty acids build up cellular membranes, regu-
late gene expression, and function as signaling molecules. There are indeed indica-
tions that omega-3 PUFAs have a positive effect on glucose tolerance by reducing 
insulin resistance, as demonstrated by animal models of obesity [ 13 ]. For the ben-
eﬁ ts in cardiovascular disorders, the American Heart Association recommends that 
the degree of PUFAs in the diet should be increased and the ratio of omega 6:3 R. Vaidya et al.
63
PUFAs needs to be reduced. This can be achieved by increased consumption of α 
linolenic acid, which is abundant in fatty ﬁ  sh like salmon, herring, and mackerel, as 
well as in lean ﬁ  sh liver, which contains large amounts of EPA and DHA, plant oils 
derived from ﬂ  axseed, soybean, and rapeseed and nuts like walnuts.  
6.2.5     Medium-Chain Triglycerides 
 Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) have a number of unique characteristics related 
to energy density, absorption, and metabolism. MCTs can decrease body fat in the 
long term because it provides an approx. 50 % increase in diet-induced thermogen-
esis, which over time may help to induce weight loss and prevent weight gain [ 14 ]. 
The satiating properties of MCTs involve multiple preabsorptive and postabsorptive 
mechanisms, which further help in appetite control and, hence, obesity. Daily con-
sumption of MCT oil by humans is safe up to 1 g/kg of body weight; there are few 
naturally occurring sources of MCTs, but they include milk fat, palm kernel oil, and 
coconut oil. A comparison trial with MCT (35 g) and LCT (32 g) supplementation 
showed that food intake was lower following consumption of MCT, suggesting an 
important role of MCTs in satiation, but energy expenditure did not signiﬁ  cantly 
differ between groups [ 15 ]. Very few studies have been recorded on MCT supple-
mentation and its effect on satiety and energy expenditure, and more research should 
be done on improvements in body composition, energy expenditure, and diminished 
weight gain resulting from MCT consumption [ 16 ].  
6.2.6     Resistant Starch 
 Depending upon food consumption practices and individual gastrointestinal pro-
cesses, it is possible that some starch will actually pass through the small intestine 
undigested and contribute to the amount of resistant starch (RS). RS is deﬁ  ned as 
“starch and starch degradation products not absorbed in the small intestine of 
healthy humans” [ 17 ]. RS is associated with nutritional, metabolic, and physio-
logical changes that make it an essential ingredient for the management of diabe-
tes and its complications [ 18 ]. The presence of RS in foods reduces their caloric 
density. Researchers have shown that RS acts as a prebiotic in the gut and pro-
duces short-chain fatty acid (SCFA); it has also been proposed that it affects car-
bohydrate and lipid metabolism. RS is present in a physically inaccessible form in 
legumes, cereals, roots, and tubers, but the formation of RS in these foods varies 
with processing and storage conditions. A study on the effect of processing on RS 
content of staple Indian cereal foods showed that roasting, baking, and pressure 
cooking increased the RS content, whereas frying and steaming decreased the 
naturally present RS content in Indian foods [ 19 ]. Hence, appropriate processing 
technologies for RS formation in foods and clinical trials with RS supplementa-
tion are needed to assess its health beneﬁ  ts.  6 Integrated Food and Nutrition in the Management of Diabetes
64
6.2.7     Nondigestible Oligosaccharides 
 Nondigestible oligosaccharides (NDOs) resist hydrolysis and digestion in the human 
digestive system and are partially or completely fermented by the colonic microbiota 
in the large intestine. The ingestion of NDOs may thus lead to the advantageous 
proliferation of certain types of beneﬁ  cial bacteria ( lactobacilli and biﬁ  dobacteria  ) 
and suppression of harmful bacteria [ 20 ]. The major products of NDO metabolism 
are SCFAs and gases. SCFAs are absorbed in the blood stream of the host. Butyrate 
is absorbed and used by colonocytes as the preferred fuel, whereas the other SCFAs 
are transferred to various organs, primarily the liver, where they enter various meta-
bolic pathways. Some of the essential NDOs are fructooligosaccharides, inulin, 
galactooligosaccharides, lactulose, galactomannan, and cyclodextrin. 
6.2.7.1     β-Glucan 
 β-glucan, found in oats and barley, is a highly viscous, soluble, and fermentable 
polysaccharide shown to have a positive effect on weight control management. It 
acts as a prebiotic and has been suspected to inﬂ  uence the glucose metabolism by 
modulation of glycemia or insulin response to a meal. It works by slowing the rate 
of nutrient absorption and lowering the glycemic index of foods and postprandial 
glucose [ 21 ]. It also has properties similar to those of prebiotics and produces 
SCFAs, which helps in various metabolic pathways and in turn in the management 
of metabolic syndrome by reducing weight, glycemic and insulinemic response   , and 
inhibiting cholesterol synthesis [ 20 ].    
6.3     Conclusions 
 Modernization and lifestyle modiﬁ  cations have resulted in poor nutrition (quantity 
and quality)   . Conversely, improved nutrition is important in preventing diabetes. 
Many functional foods may help in diabetes prevention and control. However, there 
is a need for a more systematic research approach to incorporate these functional 
foods in the newer evidence- based health foods for the management of the physio-
logical and metabolic consequences of diabetes and related chronic disorders.     
   References 
       1.    International Diabetes Federation, Unwin N, Whiting D, Gan D, Jacqmain O, Ghyoot G (eds) 
(2009) IDF diabetes atlas, 4th edn. International Diabetes Federation, Belgium, p 12  
     2.      Anjana RM, Pradeepa R, Deepa M, Datta M, Sudha V , Unnikrishnan R et al (2011) Prevalence 
of diabetes and prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance) in R. Vaidya et al.
65
urban and rural India: Phase I results of the Indian Council of Medical Research–INdia 
DIABetes (ICMR–INDIAB) study. Diabetologia 54:3022–3027  
    3.    Mohan V , Deepa M, Deepa R, Shanthirani CS, Farooq S, Ganesan A, Datta M (2006) Secular 
trends in the prevalence of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance in urban South India – the Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study (CURES-17). Diabetologia 49:1175–1178  
    4.    Mohan V , Sandeep S, Deepa R, Shah B, Varghese C (2007) Epidemiology of type 2 diabetes: 
Indian scenario. Indian J Med Res 125:217–230  
    5.    Pradeepa R, Mohan V (2002) The changing scenario of the diabetes epidemic: implications for 
India. Indian J Med Res 116:121–132  
    6.       Deepa R, Sandeep S, Mohan V (2007) Abdominal obesity, visceral fat and type 2 diabetes – 
“Asian Indian Phenotype”. In: Mohan V , Gundu HRR (eds) Type 2 diabetes in South Asians: epidemiology, risk factors and prevention, Under the Aegis of SASAT. Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers, New Delhi, pp 138–152  
    7.    Deepa M, Farooq S, Deepa R, Manjula D, Mohan V (2009) Prevalence and signiﬁ  cance of 
generalized and central body obesity in an urban Asian Indian population in Chennai, India (CURES: 47). Eur J Clin Nutr 63:259–267  
     8.    Radhika G, Sathya RM, Ganesan A, Saroja R, Vijayalakshmi P, Sudha V , Mohan V (2010) 
Dietary proﬁ  le of urban adult population in South India in the context of chronic disease epi-
demiology (CURES – 68). Public Health Nutr 14:591–598  
     9.    Radhika G, Van Damb RM, Sudha V , Ganesana A, Mohan V (2009) Reﬁ  ned grain consump-
tion and the metabolic syndrome in urban Asian Indians (Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study 57). Metab Clin Exp 58:675–681  
     10.    Mohan V , Radhika G, Rangaswamy MS, Selvi Ramjothi T, Ganesan A, Sudha V (2009) 
Dietary carbohydrates, glycemic load, food groups and newly detected type 2 diabetes among urban Asian Indian population in Chennai, India (Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study 59). Br J Nutr 102:1498–1506  
    11.    Sun Q, Spiegelman D, van Dam R, Holmes M, Malik V , Willett W, Hu F (2010) White rice, 
brown rice and risk of type 2 diabetes in US men and women. Arch Intern Med 170:961–969  
    12.      Lakshmipria N, Gayathri R, Praseena K, Vijayalakshmi P, Geetha G, Sudha V , Krishnaswamy 
K, Anjana RM, Henry J, Mohan V (2012) Type of vegetable oils used in cooking and risk of metabolic syndrome among Asian Indians. Int J Food Sci Nutr 64(2):131–139  
    13.    Storlien LH, Higgins JA, Thomas TC, Brown MA, Wang HQ (2000) Huang XF and else PL 
diet composition and insulin action in animal models. Br J Nutr 83(Suppl 1):S85–S90  
    14.       Clegg ME, Golsorkhi M, Henry CJ (2013) Combined medium-chain triglyceride and chilli 
feeding increases diet-induced thermogenesis in normal-weight humans. Eur J Nutr 52(6):1579–1585  
    15.    Wymelbeke VV , Louis-Sylvestre J, Fantino M (2001) Substrate oxidation and control of food 
intake in men after a fat-substitute meal compared with meals supplemented with an isoener-getic load of carbohydrate, long-chain triacylglycerols, or mediumchain triacylglycerols. Am J Clin Nutr 74:620–630  
    16.    Rego Costa AC, Rosado EL, Soares-Mota M (2012) Inﬂ  uence of the dietary intake of medium 
chain triglycerides on body composition, energy expenditure and satiety; a systematic review. Nutr Hosp 27(1):103–108  
    17.    Asp NG (1992) Resistant starch – proceedings from the second plenary meeting of EURESTA: 
European Flair Concerted Action no.11 on the physiological implications of the consumption of resistant starch in man. Eur J Clin Nutr 46(Suppl 2):S1  
    18.    Higgins JA (2004) Resistant starch: metabolic effects and potential health beneﬁ  ts. J AOAC Int 
87:761–768  
    19.    Vaidya RH, Sheth MK (2010) Processing and storage of Indian cereal and cereal products 
alters its resistant starch content. J Food Sci Technol 48(5):622–627  
     20.    Roberfroid M, Gibson GR, Hoyles L, McCartney AL, Rastall R, Rowland I et al (2010) 
Prebiotic effects: metabolic and health beneﬁ  ts. Br J Nutr 104(S2):S1–S63  
    21.    Battilana P, Ornstein K, Minehira K, Schwarz JM, Acheson K, Schneiter P, Burri J, Jequier E, 
Tappy L (2001) Mechanism of action of β glucan in postprandial glucose metabolism in 
healthy men. Eur J Clin Nutr 55(5):327–333    6 Integrated Food and Nutrition in the Management of Diabetes
67 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_7, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20147.1            Introduction: What Are Convalescent Foods? 
 Perhaps nowhere else in medical science other than Ayurveda is a convalescent diet 
( pathya  ) given so much importance in conjunction with treatment; according to 
Ayurveda, a treatment without  pathya   is considered to be of no signiﬁ  cance. In a 
hyperbolic tone, a celebrated text of Ayurveda,  Vaidyajivana   [ 1 ], asserts that if a 
sick person is on a suitable diet, he may not require medicine (for he will get cured 
through the effects of food only), and similarly, if he is on an unsuitable diet, he may 
not require medicine (for in the absence of suitable food a cure is unexpected irre-
spective of the course of medicine). This may be a slight exaggeration in this asser-
tion, but it reﬂ  ects the notion that food-centered health care has been an essential 
component of treatments plans throughout the history of medicine. Hippocrates, the 
father of medicine, was enthusiastic about food and its potential use as medicine 
(“ Let food be thy medicine and medicine be thy food  ”). 
 Consideration of food as an essential component of a treatment plan continued 
till the advent of rapidly acting forms of curative therapeutic interventions that paid 
little heed to diet or other adjuncts to the main therapy. As a result of the predictable 
and reproducible curative effects of stronger synthetic medicines and surgery, 
unfortunately, the fundamental principles of health were gradually sidelined by both 
patients and physicians. Although a better understanding of the pathogenesis of 
several diseases where diet might play a role in pathogenesis or cure has partially 
renewed an interest in diet in biomedicine, this interest remains conﬁ  ned to the     Chapter 7   
 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda 
             Sanjeev     Rastogi and        Priyanka     Chaudhari   
    S.   Rastogi      ( *) 
  PG Department of Kaya Chikitsa, State Ayurvedic College,        Lucknow,   India   
 e-mail: rastogisanjeev@rediffmail.com  
    P.   Chaudhari    
 Research Associate, Annals of Ayurvedic Medicine, Department of Pancha Karma, 
State Ayurvedic College and Hospital   , Lucknow, India      
68
purview of a strict evidence-based approach and to a limited set of diseases where 
such evidence is available. Diabetes, renal diseases, hepatic diseases, gout, cardio-
vascular diseases, obesity, and cancer are a few clear examples of conditions where 
a conventionally trained dietitian may play complementary role within the whole 
spectrum of disease management within a biomedical framework. Because of a 
clear association of food    at various levels of disease precipitation or management, a 
dietary recommendation in such conditions is scientiﬁ  cally justiﬁ  ed    [ 2 ]. Besides 
these few clinical conditions, diet has not established a solid foundation in biomedi-
cine, and until recently a dietary recommendation in many clinical conditions 
remained generic from a biomedical point of view and not speciﬁ  c to a particular 
disease condition. 
 Contrary to biomedicine, food as a deﬁ  nitive disease management strategy has 
long been part of traditional health care. Many special foods have been linked to the 
traditional management protocol of certain diseases. In fact, every civilization and 
culture has incorporated food-related practices in connection with disease manage-
ment, and Ayurveda in particular has been at the forefront of this convalescent food 
knowledge [ 3 ]. 
 Convalescent foods are those foods that assist the body in healing, primarily by 
providing nutrients that are essential for healing in their rapidly absorbable forms. 
At the same time, by conserving energy that is expended in the digestion of food, 
convalescent food may render additional help in the healing process. Besides this, 
the convalescent foods recommended in a particular clinical condition may also 
have certain functional components to facilitate healing in a speciﬁ  c situation.  
7.2     Types of Convalescent Foods Recommended in Ayurveda 
7.2.1     Rice-Based Convalescent Foods 
 Rice is the principal convalescent food in Ayurveda. Ayurveda recognizes the prop-
erties of rice in terms of its age and the method of cooking employed, which make 
rice useful in particular conditions. The type and age of the rice, the amount of water 
used for cooking, the duration of cooking, and the intensity of the heat    together 
deﬁ ne the ﬁ  nal outcome of rice preparation. Besides this, additions of certain herbs 
or spices can also change the therapeutic spectrum of rice preparations, making 
them more suitable for given disease conditions. 
 The following foods are the main types of rice-based convalescent foods:
    Manda      
 This is a rice preparation where the maximum amount of water is used. Sharangadhar, 
a principal proponent of Ayurvedic pharmaceutics, proposes that  manda   be pre-
pared in a 1:14 ratio with water    (Sh.Sa. Madhayama Khanda 2/170). For cooking in 
a large amount of water, the rice in  manda   completely disintegrates and results in 
complete disorganization of rice in the form of a starch solution.  Manda   is S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
69
considered the lightest of all rice-based convalescent foods in Ayurveda. The special 
properties associated with  manda   are said to be a digestive ﬁ  re promoter, prokinetic, 
softener, and diaphoretic.  Manda   is especially recommended in conditions where 
people are fasting or are detoxifying through panch karma procedures.  Manda   is 
also recommended in periods of thirst caused by the excessive intake of fatty foods 
(Ch. Su. 27/251–52). Starch is a natural emulsiﬁ  er and thus facilitates fat digestion 
through its emulsiﬁ  cation and eventual exposure to gastric lipases in the gastrointes-
tinal (GI) tract. Vagabhatta, another proponent of Ayurvedic dietetics, recommends 
 manda   because of disease eliminative properties after a pancha karma or detoxiﬁ  ca-
tion process. It is recommended that  Manda   be combined with  saindhava   (rock salt) 
and  shunthi   (zingiber)   . This combination enhances  agni  promotive property to 
 manda     .  
  Ashta guna manda   is a variant of  manda   comprised of eight components and is 
reportedly has eight special properties (Sh. Sa. Madhayam Khanda) (Table  7.1 ).
   There are many more variants of  manda   that are made up of cereals other than 
rice. They will be dealt with in subsequent sections of this chapter.
    Peya      
  Peya   refers to rice preparation where the rice is cooked in water 14 times greater 
than the amount of rice to be cooked. In this regard, it is similar to  manda  ; however, 
in  peya , the cooking is less intense so as not to disintegrate the rice completely. 
Therefore,  peya  represents a preparation where a starch solution is mixed with a 
small amount of partially disintegrated rice ( siktha  ).  Peya   is said to eliminate, thirst, 
hunger, inﬁ  rmity, diseases pertaining to the GI tract, and fever. In addition, it is 
diaphoretic, restores digestion, and helps regulate peristalsis (Charaka Su 27/250). 
In addition to these properties, Sushruta recommends  peya  for its diuretic properties    
(Sushruta Su 46/343-44). Sharangdhara adds that  peya  has antidiarrheal properties 
as well (Sharangdhara Ma.2/167).
    Vilepi      
 Compared to  manda   and  peya ,  vilepi   is thicker with a less starchy solution and more 
partially disintegrated rice (Table  7.2 ).  Vilepi   is prepared in a 1:4 ratio of  vilepi   to 
water.  Vilepi   is said to have additional properties supportive of body tissue. It is also 
said to be satisfying and conducive to heart health. For those suffering from trauma 
or eye disease or debilitated through prolonged illness or through repeated bio-
cleansing,  vilepi   is an ideal food preparation (As. Sa. 7/42).  Table 7.1    Eightfold 
components and properties 
of  Ashta Guna Manda     Components  English name  Property 
 Dhanyaka  Coriander  Clears the bladder 
 Shunthi  Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale  Eliminates Kapha 
 Marich  Piper nigrum  Enhances digestion 
 Pippali  Piper longum  Eliminates fever 
 Saindhava salt  Rock salt  Enhances blood 
 Hingu  Asafetida  Eliminates Vata 
 Rice  Oryza sativa  Vitalizer 
 Munga  Faciolus mungo  Eliminates Pitta 7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
70
     Yavagu      
  Yavagu   refer to rice-based therapeutic preparations where the rice is cooked in water 
pretreated with herbs speciﬁ  c to certain disease conditions. It can also be combined 
with preparations like  takra   (butter milk), goat milk, or various herbal decoctions. 
 Yavagu   ﬁ nd signiﬁ  cant application in Ayurveda in the area of food- based therapeu-
tics. There are 28 types of  yavagu   described in Charaka    in reference to various dis-
ease conditions (Table  7.3 ).  Yavagu   are unique in the sense that they provide 
essential nutrition and medicine for a particular disease condition at the same time. 
Similarly to  yavagu, peya   is also sometimes indicated for some speciﬁ  c therapeutic 
purposes   .
     Bhakta      
 Rice washed with water when cooked, with the excess starch removed, is called 
 bhakta  . It is considered  laghu   (easily digestible) and should be served fresh and 
warm. In contrast to this, if the rice is cooked unwashed, without removal of excess 
starch and if served cold, it is considered  guru  . As a variant to  bhakta  , rice may be 
roasted before being cooked. This  bhakta   that is made of roasted rice    is suitable in 
treating poisoning and respiratory tract diseases.  
7.2.2     Convalescent Foods Made from a Mix 
of Rice and Lentils 
     Krishara      
 Rice combined with an equal or half amount of  mung   lentil, when cooked with salt, 
zinger, asafetida, and turmeric, is called  krishara. Krishara   is said to increase  pitta  
and  kapha  , is  balya   (strength provider) and eliminates  vata  (Su. Su. 46/348). In 
addition  krishara   is also said to have aphrodisiac and cognition enhancing 
properties.     Table 7.2    Rice-based convalescent food in Ayurveda   
 Name  Amount of 
water  Method of 
cooking  Physical look 
  Manda    14 times  Prolonged  Starchy solution 
  Peya    14 times  Less prolonged  Starch solution added with small amount of partially 
disintegrated rice ( siktha  ) 
  Vilepi    4 times  Less prolonged  Less starch solution and more  siktha   
  Yavagu    6–16 times  Less prolonged  Cooked in herbs soaked or boiled water, almost 
homogenous mix of starch solution and partially 
disintegrated rice S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
71
   Table 7.3    Main type of  yavagu/peya  , their actions, and ingredients   
 Type of  Yavagu/Peya   by therapeutic action  Components 
 Antispasmodic  Pippali (Piper longum) 
 Pippali mula (Root of Piper longum)  Chavya (Piper chava)  Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)  Shunthi (Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale) 
 Antisecretory and digestive  Kaith fruit (Limonia acidissima    )  
 Bilva fruit (Aegle marmalos)  Changeri (Oxalis corniculata)  Dadim (Punica granatum)  Buttermilk 
  Peya   for loose stool with mucus and burning  Shalparni 
 Bala (Cida cardifolia)  Bilva (Aegle Marmelos)  Prishna parni  Dadim (Punica granatum) 
  Peya   for loose stool with blood  Water mixed with goat milk 
 Gandhabala (Pavonia odorata)  Utpala (variant of lotus)  Nagarmotha (Cyprus rotundus)  Prishnaparni 
  Peya   for loose stool with mucus and tenesmus  Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum) 
 Shunthi (Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale) 
 Dadima (Punica granatum) 
  Peya   for dysuria  Gokshura (Tribulus terestris) 
 Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)  Fanita (concentrated extract of sugarcane) 
  Yavagu   for intestinal worms  Vidanga (Embelica ribes) 
 Pippali mula (Piper longum)  Shigru (Moringa olifera)  Maricha (Piper nigrum)  Buttermilk  Sajjikshara 
  Yavagu   for excessive thirst  Munakka (resins) 
 Ananta mula  Dhan lava (roasted rice grains)  Honey  Nagarmotha (Cyprus rotundus) 
 Antidote  yavagu       Bakuchi (Psoralia corylipholia) 
 Anabolic  yavagu    Pig meat 
 Catabolic y avagu    Roasted gavedhuka 
 Honey 
 Unctuous  yavagu    Clariﬁ  ed butter 
 Sesame seeds  Saindhava salt 
 Roughening  yavagu    Kush root 
 Amala (Embelica ofﬁ  cinalis) 
 Saanva rice 
  Yavagu   for cough and dyspnea  Dashamoola (ten roots) 
(continued)7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
72
7.2.3     Convalescent Food Made of Lentils 
 Besides rice there are many other cereals used in making convalescent food indi-
cated in different clinical conditions. After rice, lentils are most commonly used staples for such purpose.  Shimbi dhanya   is the name given to dicots having two 
cotyledons contrary to the  shuka dhanya   which are monocots. The common exam-
ples to  shimbi   are lentils and of  shuka   are rice, maize and wheat. Type of  Yavagu/Peya   by therapeutic action  Components 
  Yavagu   for lower abdominal pain  Yamaka (honey and salt mixed together) 
 Madira 
 Purgative  yavagu    Shaka 
 Maamsa  Tila (Sesame seeds)  Maasha 
 Antidiarrheal  yavagu    Jaamun seed 
 Mango seed  Bilva fruit (Aegle marmelos) 
  Yavagu   for drastic purgation  Yavakshara 
 Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)  Hingu (Asafoetida)  Amala veta 
 Prokinetic  yavagu    Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) 
 Pippali Mula (root of Piper longum)  Shunthi (Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale) 
  Yavagu   to eliminate discomfort caused by excess 
 Ghrita   consumption  Buttermilk 
  Yavagu   to eliminate discomfort caused by excess 
 taila  intake  Buttermilk 
  Yavagu   for irregular fever  Sesame cakes 
  Yavagu   for throat diseases  Cow meat 
 Dadima (Punica granatum)  Yamaka (oil and Ghrita    mixed in equal 
proportion) 
 Barley  Pippali (Piper longum) 
  Yavagu   to eliminate pain in male reproductive 
system  Amala (Embelica ofﬁ  cinalis) 
  Yavagu   for improved reproductive function  Chicken meat 
  Yavagu   for alcoholism  Masha fried in  Ghrita      and cooked in milk 
 Upodika shaka 
  Yavagu   to decrease appetite  Curd 
 Milk  Apamarga seeds (Acyranthus aspera)  Godha meat Table 7.3  (continued)S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
73
    Yusha      
  Yusha   are food preparations made with lentils. They are prepared using different 
varieties of lentils, viz. munga, masha, masura, or moth, with either water or some other liquid medium such as an herbal decoction or buttermilk. Depending on the processing method,  yusha   can be further subdivided into  krita yusha  , where the 
whole preparation is ﬁ  nally processed with  ghrita   and spices, and  akrita yusha  , 
where the preparation is devoid of such processing.  Yusha   in general are said to pos-
sess the properties of an appetizer, vitalizer, and an enhancer of voice, complexion, vitality, and digestive capacity. It is diaphoretic, satisfying, and nourishing. Because it is fatty and warm,     yush  controls  vata , because of its fatty and  kashaya   nature 
controls  pitta  and for warm and processed nature controls  kapha     . It is evident that 
 yusha   for its variety of properties can be used to treat all clinical conditions    and 
hence is useful in all diseases.   
7.3     Fundamental Uses of  Pathya Kalpana   in Ayurveda 
  Pathya kalpana  , or the notion of convalescent food, was initiated in Ayurveda in 
reference to the post-pancha karma state of digestion where  agni  is said to be hypo-
functioning and hence to require help to become activated again. For this reason, after any major puriﬁ  cation process in Ayurveda, food is gradually reintroduced in 
order to provide sufﬁ  cient time for gastrointestinal recovery and to promote diges-
tion in a stepwise manner. A gradual introduction to  peya, vilepi, yusha, mamsa 
rasa , and  anna   is therefore recommended after pancha karma procedures like 
 vamana   and  virechana  .  
7.4     Scientiﬁ  c Rationale of  Pathya Kalpana   
 Intricate details about various convalescent food preparations of Ayurveda propose 
that a small difference in the method of cooking or processing can result in huge differences in the net properties and eventual therapeutic effects of those food prep-arations. This comes as a natural curiosity to enquire if these claims of infusing therapeutic beneﬁ  ts through the method of cooking have a scientiﬁ  c basis?    We 
examined Ayurvedic convalescent food preparations    in the spirit of scientiﬁ  c 
enquiry in light of experimental and clinical evidence from the ﬁ  elds of biomedi-
cine, Ayurveda, and allied sciences and have been able to link the threads of wisdom scattered throughout Ayurveda with that of stringent evidence from the ﬁ  eld of sci-
ence. The journey was revealing and breathtaking    and showed how many Ayurvedic convalescent food practices could be applied to health care. 7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
74
7.4.1     Aged Versus Fresh Rice 
 Ayurveda attaches considerable importance to aged over fresh rice for its prohealth 
attributes. Aged rice is considered  laghu  , which means it easily digested and hence 
suitable for all clinical conditions. Fresh rice, in contrast, is considered  guru   and, 
hence, delays digestion, eventually causing conditions like  prameha   or diabetes 
mellitus. A  laghu   or  guru   classiﬁ  cation of food in Ayurveda is principally a working 
classiﬁ  cation of food based on its composition, explaining its digestion in different 
proportions of time   . A food composed of complex components is presumed to con-
sume more time for digestion compared to simple foods, which are digested in less 
time. The former is considered  guru   and the later  laghu  , according to Ayurveda. 
 Different cultures have different preferences between fresh and aged rice. India 
prefers aged rice over fresh rice, whereas in many places in Southeast Asia fresh rice is 
preferred [ 4 ]. Fresh rice when cooked gives a highly sticky and soft texture comparing 
to the hard and nonsticky texture of aged rice. Many factors have been proposed to 
explain the textural differences between fresh and aged rice upon cooking. An increase 
in free fatty acid content during rice storage and subsequent prevention of gelatiniza-
tion [ 5 ], changes in the physicochemical properties of rice starch [ 6 ], and changes in 
grain-structure-maintaining substances [ 7 ] have been cited as causes of the textural 
differences between fresh and aged rice. Starch granules of stored rice have been 
shown to be more resistant to swelling than those of fresh rice. An larger amount of 
resistant starch has been identiﬁ  ed in aged rice compared to fresh rice, which has more 
rapidly digestible starch. This produces a very remarkable therapeutic beneﬁ  t associ-
ated with the aging of rice – its low glycemic index compared to fresh rice, which has 
a high glycemic index [ 8 ]. Besides its quick digestibility, this might also be why 
Ayurveda considers aged rice better than fresh rice. Incidentally,  navanna   (fresh staple) 
is said to be a prominent causative factor in  Prameha  , an Ayurvedic corollary to diabe-
tes mellitus. Despite the Indian preference for aged rice, a high incidence of diabetes in 
India compared to many other countries where fresh rice is preferred over aged rice is, 
however, a contradictory observation that will require scientiﬁ  c clarity [ 9 ]. Textural 
changes in aged rice have also been attributed to the oxidation of proteins in the exter-
nal grain layer. Fresh rice has some albumen and globulin in its external layers that are 
dissolved when fresh rice is soaked in water. During aging, albumin and globulin are 
polymerized and their intermolecular disulﬁ  de linkage become difﬁ  cult to dissolve [ 4 ]. 
 Rice grain storage has also been found to lead to the hydrolysis or degradation of 
some of its starch components, causing a proportional increase in reducing sugars and 
a decrease in nonreducing sugars. The health impacts of such changes in rice, how-
ever, remain unknown    [ 10 ].  
7.4.2     Effect of Water Soaking and Boiling on Rice Grains 
 The preceding discussion about rice-based convalescent food proposes that the 
principal difference between varieties of cooked rice arises from the amount 
of water, how long it is cooked, and the amount of heat used for cooking. S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
75
The Ayurvedic proposition of rice-based convalescent food suggests a sequential 
food order beginning with food that may require a minimum of digestion before it 
can be absorbed. Foods higher in the order imply an increasing amount of digestion 
required before the food can be absorbed and until one can switch to normal food 
with the return of normal digestion. 
 A rice grain is composed of 90 % starch, 2 % lipids, 6 % protein, and approxi-
mately 1 % minerals [ 11 ]. There are two types of starch in rice, amylose and amy-
lopectin   . The proportion and structure of these two starches largely deﬁ  ne the 
quality of the rice when it is cooked. Amylose is a linear form of starch and its 
quantity is inversely related to the stickiness of rice upon cooking   . 
 Soaking of rice grains in water allows the water to enter into the amorphous 
space of rice starch. Gelatinization is the thermal disordering of the crystalline 
structure of starch granules and includes related events such as the swelling of 
the granules and leaching of the soluble polysaccharides [ 12 ] in the external 
medium. Rice starch granules consist of two α-D glucose polymers: nearly lin-
ear amylose and highly branched amylopectin. Within starch granules, three 
different regions are distinguished, i.e., alternating amorphous (low electron 
density) and semicrystalline growth rings (thickness 120–400 nm). The latter 
consist of crystalline (high electron density) and amorphous (low electron den-
sity) lamellae with a repeat distance of 9–11 nm [ 13 ]. Crystalline lamellae result 
from the double helix formation of amylopectin side chains, which aggregate to 
form crystals, whereas amorphous lamellae mainly contain amorphous amylo-
pectin branch points [ 14 ]. When starch granules are heated in excess water 
above the gelatinization temperature (the temperature at which gelatinization 
occurs), the supramolecular order (crystalllinity) and 9–11 nm repeat are lost. 
Apart from this phenomenon, water absorption, and thus swelling of the gran-
ule, and amylose leaching occur during gelatinization. 
 The sequential events that take place during the boiling of rice are the swelling 
of starch granules followed by disordering of the crystalline structure, followed by 
further temperature-dependent swelling to reach a maximum swelling factor. 
Swelling is evidently a property of amylopectin, and amylose acts as diluent   . Upon 
further swelling beyond the maximum swelling factor, polysaccharides are leached 
from the granules to produce a starch solution. Upon cooling, the starch solution 
retrogrades to form a thick gel, and this retrogradation time depends upon the rela-
tive proportion of amylose and amylopectin in the starch. An amylose-rich starch 
solution    crystallizes early compared to the delayed crystallization of amylopectin. 
Upon cooling, a starch gel is formed that undergoes structural changes during stal-
ing. This so-called retrogradation process involves the crystallization of amylose 
(after several hours) and amylopectin (after several days or weeks) [ 15 ]. 
 Stale rice and stale rice starch    solutions are discarded in Ayurveda. It is possibly 
because of retrogradation property of starch, which allows soluble starch to recrys-
tallize and renders them difﬁ  cult to digest besides many other chemical changes 
affecting the ultimate desired sensory and biological characteristic of the rice or its 
solution [ 16 ]. Incidentally, stale and cooled rice is considered  guru   in Ayurveda, 
which again symbolizes the resynthesised complexity of starch   , rendering it difﬁ  -
cult to digest. Retrogradation limits the possibility of amylase hydrolysis to occur. 7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
76
  Manda   preparation with water in a water-to-rice ratio of 14:1 allows the rice 
grains to swell up completely until they burst and allow the dissolved amylose to 
leach out into the outer solution. If more water is used in cooking, all the starch 
actually leaches out to create a starch solution. The advantage of creating such a 
solution is that it provides a greater surface area of starch for starch-digesting 
enzymes to act upon.  Peya  , the next in order to rice preparations,    is a combination 
of a starch solution with a certain amount of partially degraded rice grains. Because 
of the availability of partially degraded rice grains,  peya  requires more time to digest 
and hence is considered  guru   compared to  manda. Vilepi  , the next preparation   , is 
considered a  guru   of all three because it contains the largest amount of partially 
degraded rice, which forms a kind of sediment in the starch solution. 
 Another advantage of cooking rice in a high water rice ratio is that it reduces its 
arsenic content [ 17 ]. Although it may not directly affect the digestibility of the rice 
preparation, its beneﬁ  cial effects upon a convalescing digestive system cannot be 
overlooked.  
7.4.3     Food Made of a Rice and Lentil Mix 
 Rice and lentils constitute an ideal composition of food in terms of the advantages 
offered by these two foods independently. Rice is deﬁ  cient in essential amino acids 
such as lysine, which is found in abundance in legumes. Legumes, on the other 
hand, are deﬁ  cient in methionine, which is abundant in rice. Rice and legumes 
therefore complement each other, offering the best    food through a combination that 
is not available from the two foods individually. In recognition of this fact, rice is 
almost universally used in conjunction with legumes throughout the world, espe-
cially in India, where several varieties of the combination are common [ 18 ]. The 
beneﬁ  cial effects of a cereal-pulse mix supplementation are not limited to its ideal 
nutrient combination; it also offers glycemic and lipemic control. One study on 30 
non-insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus patients indicated that supplementation of 
a cereal-pulse mix for 1 to 2 months had a favorable effect in controlling hypergly-
cemia and hyperlipidemia [ 19 ]. Ayurvedic health beneﬁ  t recommendations associ-
ated with  krishara   may be viewed in light of these studies; however, more studies 
may be required to elucidate these beneﬁ  ts further   .  
7.4.4     Lentil Broth and Soup  
 Lentils contain an average of 28.6 % proteins, 4.4 % ﬁ  ber, 63.1 % total carbohydrate 
(nitrogen-free extract), 44.3 % starch, and 4,186 kcal/kg of gross energy. Lentil 
starch contains 36.1 % amylose. Approximately one-half (47.1 %) of lentil proteins 
are soluble in salt solution and 3.8 % in water. Lentils contain 6.8 % of total nitrogen 
   as nonprotein nitrogen. The major amino acids found in lentils are glutamic acid, S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
77
aspartic acid, arginine, leucine, and lysine; the minor amino acids are methio nine, 
cystine, and tryptophan. Because of the lower concentrations of the latter amino 
acids, lentil proteins give a chemical score of 35, a protein score of 46, and an 
essential amino acid index (EAAI) of 63 relative to egg protein [ 20 ]. 
 Lentil broth is a watery solution made of lentils without admixing it with other 
foods or thickening agents. One nutritional advantage linked with lentil broth is that 
it contains higher amounts of water-soluble amino acids. A high amount of leucine, 
phenylalanin, glycine, and proline is detectable in the watery contents of lentil 
broth. EAAI, which is a crude score for nutritive values of raw and cooked lentils, 
increases in lentils after cooking. Furthermore, the addition of salt to the cooking 
water increases the soluble fraction of amino acids in lentil broth [ 21 ]. 
 It is appropriate to note here that in Ayurveda, a  yush  preparation, which resem-
bles lentil broth, has two varieties,  akrita   and  krita. Akrita   consists of a plain water 
solution of lentils, whereas  krita   is the one when the same solution is treated with 
   salt,  ghrita  , and other appetizing spices. These two preparations of lentils are intro-
duced one by one for a speciﬁ  c number of meal times in accordance actual require-
ment. The transition from  akrita   to  krita   is a method for gradually introducing food 
of increasing nutritive value and complexity. A  sansarjana krama  , which is fol-
lowed    after major evacuative procedures like  vamana   and  virechana  , is a natural 
way to gradually accustom an assaulted digestive system to the normal digestive 
process within the span of a few days ranging between 3 and 7 days.  
7.4.5     Method of Food Processing and Glycemic Index 
 The classiﬁ  cation of foods based on their glycemic index has disproved the notion that 
carbohydrate-rich foods are deleterious to one's health, and hence their consumption 
should be limited [ 22 ,  23 ]. Numerous evidence-based studies endorse the Ayurvedic 
view of process-based differentiation of food effects and dismiss the negativity sur-
rounding carbohydrate-rich foods by demonstrating that not all carbohydrates have 
the same physiological effects [ 24  –  26 ]. A variation in the physicochemical properties 
of complex carbohydrates has been shown to elicit dissimilar physiological effects 
when consumed [ 27 ]. The method of cooking is the most important factor because it 
can alter the structure and nature of starches, resulting in signiﬁ  cant effects on post-
prandial blood glucose responses [ 28 ]. One study showed that boiling sweet potatoes 
elicited lower GI values compared to frying, baking, and roasting [ 29 ]. This differen-
tial glycemic response may be linked to the chemical structure of starches, that is, the 
amylose-amylopectin ratio [ 30 ]. Rice with higher amylose content is reportedly asso-
ciated with a lowered metabolic response and lower GI values [ 24 ,  31 ]. Boiling 
induces gelatinization and makes starches more readily digestible by permanent dis-
ruption of amylose–amylopectin bonds. At the same time, retrograded amylose is 
indigestible due to the presence of stronger hydrogen bonding in comparison with 
retrograded amylopectin [ 32 ]. At the same time, larger amounts of resistant starches 
may be retained in boiled foods. Furthermore, as these foods cool, the possibility of 7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
78
forming resistant starches (retrograded starches) increases. This occurs as the starches 
undergo recrystallization due to the formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds. 
Other resistant starches present in foods after the leaching of free sugars during the 
boiling process also play a role in retarding the enzymatic degradation of starches, 
thereby reducing the glycemic response. It is reported that approximately 7 % of 
starch in reheated boiled potatoes ( Solanum tuberosum   sp.) escapes digestion in the 
ileum compared with approximately 3 % in freshly cooked potatoes [ 28 ]. Ayurveda 
similarly proposes various methods of cooking and endorses differentially processed 
food with different biological properties. In a similar vein, roasted barley is recom-
mended for diabetics compared to other methods of food preparation. The idea behind 
this is that a lower GI is associated with roasting compared to other methods of cook-
ing. Because roasting requires a small amount of water, it causes an incomplete gela-
tinization of starches, eventually leading to an incomplete conversion of resistant 
starches to less-resistant starches. This incomplete conversion eventually leads to a 
lower glycemic response to roasted foods.   
7.5     Conclusions 
 Convalescent foods are foods that assist the body's healing process, primarily by pro-
viding essential nutrients needed for healing and at the same time by conserving 
energy normally expended on the digestion of food that may now be consumed in the 
healing process. In addition, the convalescent foods recommended in a particular 
clinical condition may also have certain functional components to facilitate healing in 
a speciﬁ  c situation. A roasted barley preparation for use in diabetes treatment    and a 
buttermilk-based rice and lentil mix ( krishara  ) for use in the treatment of diarrhea are 
examples of the latter situation. Moreover,  samsarjana krama  , which is practiced as a 
speciﬁ  ed dietary protocol following the exhaustive eliminative therapies of Ayurveda, 
particularly  vamana   and  virechana  , constitutes recognition of the mucosal insult    of 
the GI tract following such procedures. As a result, secretory cells in the intestinal 
mucosa shed more rapidly than usual, resulting in poor digestion    until the cells are 
regenerated. Depending on the intensity of the eliminative process, the insult may be 
mild, moderate, or severe, and the subsequent recovery period may be short or long 
depending on the actual insult. This is why a 3- to 7-day  samsarjana   is usually recom-
mended following the eliminative processes of pancha karma. The order of food intro-
duction in  samsarjana   is again interesting. It begins with rapidly digestible starches 
and moves on to more complex starches, followed by a gradual introduction of water-
oluble amino acids alone and processed in spiced  ghrita  . A more complex protein is 
introduced subsequently before the body is exposed to ormal food. Clearly, the whole 
exercise is a systematic attempt to cope with the posible harm caused by the elimina-
tive process and to provide the body with an excellent pportunity to heal in an orderly 
manner. Convalescent food as a healing modality seems to be a unique contribution of 
Ayurveda and requires more rigorous investigation for incorporation into conven-
tional health care across the globe [ 33 ].     S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
79
   References 
    1.      Lolimbaraja, Vaidyajivan English translation and notes by Nirmal Saxena, Chaukhambha 
Publication, Varanasi 2010  
    2.    Dahm CC, Keogh RH, Spencer EA, Greenwood DC, Key TJ, Fentiman IS, Shipley MJ, 
Brunner EJ, Cade JE, Burley VJ, Mishra G, Stephen AM, Kuh D, White IR, Luben R, Lentjes 
MA, Khaw KT, Rodwell Bingham SA (2010) Dietary ﬁ  ber and colorectal cancer risk: a nested 
case–control study using food diaries. J Natl Cancer Inst 102(9):614–626. doi:  10.1093/jnci/
djq092    , epub 20 Apr 2010  
    3.    Gupta LP (1999) Biogenic secrets of food in Ayurveda. Chaukhambha Sanskrit Pratishthan, 
Delhi  
     4.    Ohno T, Ohisa N (2005) Studies on textuaral and chemical changes in aged rice grains. Food 
Sci Technol Res 11(4):385–389  
    5.    Yasumastu K, Moritaka S, Kakinuma T (1964) Effects of the change during storage in lipid 
composition of rice on its amylogram. Agric Biol Chem 28:265–272  
    6.    Villareal RM, Resurreccion AP, Suzuki LB, Juliano BO (1976) Changes in the physicochemi-
cal properties of the rice during storage. Starke 28:88–94  
    7.    Shibuya N, Iwasaki T (1982) Effects of enzymatic removal of endosperm cell wall on the 
gelatinization property of aged and unaged rice ﬂ  ours. Starch 34:300–303  
    8.    Panlasigui LN, Thompson LU, Juliano BO, Perez CM, Yiu SH, Greenberg GR (1991) Rice 
varieties with similar amylose content differ in starch digestibility and glycemic response in 
humans. Am J Clin Nutr 54(5):871–877  
    9.    Wild S, Roglic G, Green A, Sicree R, King H (2004) Global prevalence of diabetes: estimates 
for the year 2000 and projections for 2030. Diabetes Care 27(5):1047–1053  
    10.      Zhou Z, Robards K, Helliwel S, Blanchard C (2002) Aging of stored rice: changes in chemical 
and physical attributes. J Cereal Sci 35(1):65–78  
    11.   Cuevas RP, Fitzgerald M (2007–08) Linking starch structure to its cooking quality. IREC 
Farmers’ Newsletter, no. 177, p 16–17  
    12.    Atwell WA, Hood LF, Lineback DR (1988) The terminiology and methodilokgy associated 
with basic starch phenomena. Cereal Foods World 33:306  
    13.    Cameron RE, Donald AM (1993) Carbohydr Res 244:225–236  
    14.    Donald AM, Perry PA, Waigh TA (1999) Fibre Diffr Rev 8:31–37  
    15.    Suzuki T, Chiba A, Yano T (1997) Carbohydate Polymers 34:357–363  
    16.      Yao Y , Zhang J, Ding X Retrogradation of starch mixtures containing rice starch. Journal of 
Food Sciences, 68(1):260–265  
    17.      Raab A, Baskaran C, Feldmann J, Meharg AA (2008) Cooking rice in a high water to rice ratio 
reduces inorganic arsenic content, First published as an Advance Article on the web 20 Nov 
2008. J Environ Monit 11:41–44, doi:10.1039/b816906cw.rsc.org/jem  
    18.     http://culinarydesignsolutions.wordpress.com/2010/02/07/amino-acids-its-all-about-rice-and-
legumes/      
    19.    Mani UV , Iyer U, Mani I, Desikachar HSR (1997) Long-term effect of cereal-pulse mix (dia-
betic mix) supplementation on serum lipid proﬁ  le in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
patients. J Nutr Environ Med 7(3):163–168  
    20.    Bhatty RS, Slinkard AE, Sosulski FW (1976) Chemical composition and protein characterstics 
of lentils. Can J Plant Sci 56(4):787–794. doi:  10.4141/cjps76-128      
    21.    Pirman T, Stiblij V , Stekar JMA, Combe E (2001) Amino acid composition of beans and lentil. 
Zb Bioteh Fak Univ Ljubl, Kmet Zooteh 78(1):57–68  
    22.    Liu S, Willett WC (2002) Dietary glycemic load and atherothrombotic risk. Curr Atheroscler 
Rep 4(6):454–461  
    23.       Willett W, Manson J, Liu S (2002) Glycemic index, glycemic load, and risk of type 2 diabetes. 
Am J Clin Nutr 76(1):274S–280S  
     24.    Miller JB, Pang E, Bramall L (1992) Rice: a high or low glycemic index food? Am J Clin Nutr 
56(6):1034–1036  7 Convalescent Food Practices in Ayurveda
80
   25.    Bahado-Singh PS, Wheatley AO, Ahmad MH, Morrison EY , Asemota HN (2006) Food pro-
cessing methods inﬂ  uence the glycaemic indices of some commonly eaten West Indian 
carbohydrate- rich foods. Br J Nutr 96(3):476–481  
    26.    Jenkins DJA, Kendall CWC, McKeown-Eyssen G et al (2008) Effect of a low-glycemic index 
or a high-cereal ﬁ  ber diet on type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. JAMA 300(23):2742–2753  
    27.    Riley CK, Bahado-Singh PS, Wheatley AO, Ahmad MH, Asemota HN (2008) Relationship 
between the physicochemical properties of starches and the glycemic indices of some Jamaican yams (Dioscorea spp.). Mol Nutr Food Res 52(11):1372–1376  
     28.    Englyst HN, Cummings JH (1987) Digestion of polysaccharides of potato in the small intes-
tine of man. Am J Clin Nutr 45(2):423–431  
    29.      Bahado-Singh PS, Riley CK, Wheatley AO, Lowe HIC (2011) Relationship between process-
ing method and the glycemic indices of ten sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) cultivars com-monly consumed in Jamaica. J Nutr Metab. Article ID 584832  
    30.    Bjorck I, Granfeldt Y , Liljeberg H, Tovar J, Asp NG (1994) Food properties affecting the 
digestion and absorption of carbohydrates. Am J Clin Nutr 59(3):699S–705S  
    31.    Goddard MS, Young G, Marcus R (1984) The effect of amylose content on insulin and glucose 
responses to ingested rice. Am J Clin Nutr 39(3):388–392  
    32.    Englyst H, Wiggins HS, Cummings JH (1982) Determination of the non-starch polysaccha-
rides in plant foods by gas–liquid chromatography of constituent sugars as alditol acetates. Analyst 107(1272):307–318  
    33.    Rastogi S (2012) Transforming Ayurveda: stepping into the realm of evidence – based prac-
tice. In: Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, Singh RH (eds) Evidence based practice in complementary and alternative medicine: perspectives, protocols, problems and potentials in Ayurveda. Springer, Berlin/London, pp 33–50    S. Rastogi and P. Chaudhari
81 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_8, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20148.1            Introduction 
 Cancer remains a major cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide [ 1 ]. There are 
over 200 different known cancers that afﬂ  ict humans. The global burden of cancer 
continues to increase largely because of the aging and growth of the world popula-
tion alongside an increasing adoption of cancer-causing behaviors. Although over-
all cancer incidence rates in the developing world are half those seen in the developed 
world in both sexes, overall cancer mortality rates are generally similar. Cancer 
survival tends to be poorer in developing countries, most likely because of a combi-
nation of a late stage at diagnosis and limited access to timely and standard treat-
ment [ 2 ]. Commonly used cancer treatments, including chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy, often have side effects, and a complete cure is sometimes impossible. 
Therefore, prevention, suppression, or delaying the onset of the disease is important 
[ 3 ]. The majority of cancers are due to modiﬁ  able lifestyle and environmental risk 
factors and are potentially preventable [ 4 ,  5 ]. Experimental evidence indicates a 
strong connection between oxidative damage, cancer, and aging. Epidemiological 
observations suggest that a diet rich in fruits and vegetables is associated with lower 
incidence of some cancers and longer life expectancy; since fruits and vegetables 
contain natural antioxidants, considerable effort has been dedicated to understand-
ing their effects in experimental studies and in human trials [ 6 ]. There is increased 
appreciation by the scientiﬁ  c community that dietary phytochemicals can be poten-
tial weapons in the ﬁ  ght against cancer. Emerging research has provided new 
insights into the molecular and cellular framework needed to establish novel 
mechanism- based strategies for cancer prevention by selective bioactive food     Chapter 8   
 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer 
Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective 
             Sanjoy     Kumar     Pal    
        S .   K .    P a l       ( *) 
  School of Animal & Range Sciences, College of Agriculture & Environmental Sciences , 
 Haramaya University ,   Post Box: 138 ,  Dire Dawa ,  Ethiopia   
 e-mail: sanjoypal@yahoo.com  
82
components [ 7 ]. In the future, diet will play an important role in the management of 
cancer as it will be the major intake source of important functional components    [ 8 ]. 
 In recent decades, research on various complementary and alternative medicine 
(CAM) practices that deal with cancer management have received tremendous 
attention. Ayurveda, a traditional Indian system of medicine, has been successful 
since ancient times at using many natural drugs in preventing or suppressing a vari-
ety of tumors using various lines of treatment [ 9 ,  10 ]. Ayurveda is almost 5,000 
years old and deals not only with the body but with the mind and spirit as well. It is 
designed to promote good health and longevity rather than to ﬁ  ght disease [ 29 ]. 
According to Ayurveda, most diseases connected with psychophysiologic and 
pathologic changes in the body are caused by imbalances in three different doshas     
(i.e.,  Vata ,  Pitta  , and  Kapha  ). The fundamental aim of Ayurvedic therapy is to 
restore the balance between these three major body systems [ 11 – 13 ]. Ayurvedic 
texts emphasize proper diet ( ahara  ) as being vital for promoting health and well- 
being. The Ayurvedic system of medicine also prescribes more than 700 plant-based 
medicines that contain spices and food additives to encourage good health [ 14 ]. 
Although this traditional medicine has been around for thousands of years, the 
scientiﬁ  c community has started to pay serious attention to it only recently. 
Following Ayurvedic principles a new paradigm for food-based cancer prevention 
and management can be developed to reduce the burden of this malignant disease.  
8.2     Conventional View of Cancer 
 Cancers are primarily an environmental disease, with 90–95 % of cases attributable 
to environmental factors and 5–10 % to genetics, i.e., they are inherited genetically 
[ 15 ]. Many things are known to increase the risk of cancer, including tobacco use, 
certain infections, radiation, lack of physical activity, obesity, and environmental 
pollutants [ 5 ]. Cancer is a highly complex disease whose development may take as 
many as 20–30 years before it can be detected (Garodia et al. [ 29 ]). In general, a 
given cancer cannot also be blamed entirely on a single event or a single cause. As 
a rule, the genesis of a cancer requires several independent, rare genetic accidents to 
occur together in one cell with cumulative effects. The development of cancer gen-
erally involves many steps, each governed by multiple factors. There are many 
intrinsic factors, like oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, angio-
genesis, stem cells, and hormones, and extrinsic factors, like infection, contact with 
(touching, eating, drinking, or breathing) harmful substances, radiation (both ion-
izing and nonionizing), and environmental pollutants; and, most importantly, diet 
and lifestyle play a key role in the development of cancer. 
 Many types of genes are involved in the development of cancer. The ﬁ  rst group 
of genes implicated in the development of cancer are damaged genes, so-called 
oncogenes. Oncogenes are genes whose presence in certain forms or overactivity 
can stimulate the development of cancer. When oncogenes arise in normal cells, 
they can cause the cells to become malignant or cancerous [ 16 ]. Oncogenes S.K. Pal
83
contribute to the development of cancer by instructing cells to make proteins that 
stimulate excessive cell growth and division. A second group of genes implicated in 
cancer are the tumor suppressor genes. Tumor suppressor genes are normal genes 
whose absence can lead to cancer. In other words, if a pair of tumor suppressor 
genes is either lost from a cell or inactivated by mutation, its functional absence can 
cause cancer [ 17 ]. One particular tumor suppressor gene codes for a protein called 
p53, which can trigger cell suicide (apoptosis). In cells that have undergone DNA 
damage, the p53 protein acts like a brake pedal and halts cell growth and division. 
If the damage cannot be repaired, the p53 protein eventually initiates cell suicide, 
thereby preventing the genetically damaged cell from growing out of control. 
A third class of genes implicated in cancer are called DNA repair genes. DNA repair 
genes code for proteins whose normal function is to correct errors that arise when 
cells duplicate their DNA prior to cell division [ 18 ]. Mutations in DNA repair genes 
can lead to a failure in DNA repair, which in turn allows subsequent mutations in 
tumor suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes to accumulate. 
 Angiogenesis is a physiological process through which new blood vessels form 
from preexisting vessels. This is distinct from vasculogenesis, in which new blood 
vessel formation of endothelial cells takes place from mesoderm cell precursors [ 19 ]. 
The ﬁ  rst vessels in the embryo form through vasculogenesis, after which angiogen-
esis is responsible for most, if not all, blood vessel growth during development and 
in disease. Angiogenesis is a normal and vital process in growth and development, as 
well as in wound healing and in granulation tissue [ 20 ]. However, it is also a funda-
mental step in the transition of tumors from a dormant state to a malignant one. 
It may be possible at a particular given time our body may contain many malignant 
micro tumors. However, these tumors cannot grow and become life threatening in the 
absence of blood supply. However, some tumors can mimic signals for making new 
blood vessels around them, and as they start securing a reliable food supply, they 
gradually increase in size and shed cells that can metastasize into other organs. 
 Stem cells are primal cells common to all multicellular organisms that retain the 
ability to renew themselves through cell division and can differentiate into a wide 
range of specialized cell types [ 21 ]. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are cancer cells 
(found within tumors or hematological cancers) that possess characteristics associ-
ated with normal stem cells, speciﬁ  cally the ability to give rise to all cell types found 
in a particular cancer sample. CSCs are therefore tumorigenic (tumor-forming), per-
haps in contrast to other nontumorigenic cancer cells. CSCs may generate tumors 
through the stem cell processes of self-renewal and differentiation into multiple cell 
types. Such cells are proposed to persist in tumors as a distinct population and cause 
relapse and metastasis by giving rise to new tumors [ 22 ]. 
 Some hormones play an important role in the development of cancer by promoting 
cell proliferation. Hormones are important agents in sex-related cancers such as 
cancer of the breast, endometrium, prostate, ovary, and testis and of thyroid cancer 
and bone cancer [ 23 ]. 
 Substances that cause DNA mutations are known as mutagens, and mutagens 
that cause cancers are known as carcinogens. Decades of research has led to the 
identiﬁ  cation of many carcinogens [ 24 ]. A strong association has been found 8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
84
between tobacco use and cancer of the lung, larynx, head, neck, stomach, bladder, 
kidney, esophagus, and pancreas. Tobacco smoking is associated with many forms 
of cancer, and causes 90 % of lung cancer [ 25 ]. Tobacco smoke contains over 50 
known carcinogens, including nitrosamines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Tobacco is responsible for approximately one in three of all cancer deaths in the 
developed world, and approximately one in ﬁ  ve worldwide. Up to 10 % of invasive 
cancers are related to radiation exposure, including both ionizing radiation and non-
ionizing radiation [ 5 ]. Additionally, the vast majority of noninvasive cancers are 
nonmelanoma skin cancers caused by nonionizing ultraviolet radiation.  
8.3     Cancer from an Ayurvedic Perspective 
 In contrast to the critical analytical approach of modern Western medicine, Ayurveda 
adopts a holistic approach and propounds a broad-based understanding of the enti-
ties of life, health, and disease [ 26 ]. Ayurvedic literature deﬁ  nes three body-control 
systems, viz., the nervous system ( Vata  or air), the venous system ( Pitta   or ﬁ re), and 
the arterial system ( Kapha   or water), which mutually coordinate to perform the 
normal functions of the body [ 9 ]. Any imbalance in these body-control systems can 
result in a disease state. The fundamental aim of Ayurvedic therapy is to restore the 
balance between these three major body systems. The therapeutic approach of 
Ayurveda has been divided into four categories:  Prakritisthapani chikitsa   (health 
maintenance),  Roganashani chikitsa   (disease cure),  Rasayana chikitsa   (restoration 
of normal function), and  Naishthiki chikitsa   (spiritual approach) [ 27 ]. Finding the 
cause of an illness is the basic goal of Ayurvedic therapy. It classiﬁ  es disease devel-
opment into six stages, including aggravation, accumulation, overﬂ  ow, relocation, 
buildup in a new location, and manifestation into a recognizable disease. Ayurvedic 
physicians can diagnose an illness even at the initial stages of body imbalance, and 
their therapeutic approach maintains a balance by supplying deﬁ  cient substances 
and reducing excessive ones [ 9 ]. 
 Ayurveda describes the different stages of tumorigenesis as chronic inﬂ  amma-
tory and intractable diseases with the possibility of developing malignancy. Two 
well-known Ayurvedic classics,  Charaka   samhita [ 13 ] and  Sushruta   samhita [ 12 ], 
describe cancer as inﬂ  ammatory or noninﬂ  ammatory swelling and mention them as 
either  granthi   (minor neoplasm) or  arbuda   (major neoplasm). 
 According to Ayurveda, cancer results from lifestyle errors, such as unhealthy 
foods, poor hygiene, or poor behavior, or from physical trauma, all leading to imbal-
ances of  Vata ,  Pitta  , and  Kapha     , resulting in injury to the inner layer of the dermis 
 Rohini   (the sixth layer of the skin) and the formation of abnormal branches of blood 
vessels [ 28 ]. In this stage, early  granthi   or a rbuda   can develop in the form of bubble- 
shaped glandular growths; however, both are external and visible growths only. 
 Granthi   has been described as a round, hard, and bulging swelling produced owing to 
the aggravation of  Vata  and  Kapha  , vitiating the muscle, blood, and fatty tissues. 
 Arbuda   has been described as a round, large, muscular, immovable, deeply rooted, S.K. Pal
85
slowly growing swelling produced owing to the aggravation of doshas, vitiating the 
muscle, blood, and fatty tissues. Both types of swelling can be inﬂ  ammatory or non-
inﬂ ammatory, depending on the doshas involved. In benign neoplasm ( Vataja  ,  Pittaja  , 
or  Kaphaja  ) one or two of the three bodily systems are out of control which is not too 
harmful    because the body is still trying to coordinate among these systems. Malignant 
tumors ( Tridosaja  ) are very harmful because all three major bodily systems lose 
mutual coordination and thus cannot prevent tissue damage, resulting in a deadly 
morbid condition [ 9 ]. Internal tumors are represented in the context of different 
diseases having various symptoms caused by such tumors. In every disease descrip-
tion, the  trodoshaja   presentation gives an opportunity for tumorigenesis to set in. 
Intra-abdominal tumors may be identiﬁ  ed under the head of  Gulma   (abdominal swell-
ings). It is important to state that the Ayurvedic nomenclature of a disease is based 
only on the similarity of the manifestations and not as per the speciﬁ  c pathophysiology 
involved therein. The different pathophysiologies leading to the same presentation is 
dealt with under the subdivisions of the disease where imbalances of various bodily 
systems like Vata, Pitta , or Kapha are attributed to the cause of the disease   . 
 Cancer pathogenesis in Ayurveda is explained on the basis of  Tridoshas. Agni   or 
 Pitta  , which is present in all cells, is responsible for digestion and metabolism in the 
human body. A decrease in  agni  is inversely proportional to the related tissue, and 
therefore, in  arbuda  , a decreased state of  dhatwagni   (deranged metabolism) will 
result in excessive tissue growth.  Vata  can be correlated with the catabolic phase of 
growth and  kapha   to the anabolic phase. Cancer originates due to a metabolic crisis, 
i.e., aggravation of  Vata  forces and suppression of  kapha   forces, both interacting 
with one another, resulting in proliferation of the cancer   . However, abnormal can-
cerous growth in a speciﬁ  c organ ( Eka-desa-vriddhi  ) is managed through compen-
sation from other parts of the body ( Anya-sthaniya-kshaya  ), e.g., body weight loss 
(cachexia). Various signs and symptoms, viz., anemia, cachexia, or anorexia, arising 
due to the progression of the cancer have also been described in detail in the classic 
Ayurvedic literature [ 29 ]. 
 The factors responsible for the vitiation of  doshas   are as follows [ 9 ]:
    (a)     Vata-aggravating factors  : excessive intake of bitter, pungent, astringent, dry 
foods and stressful conditions.   
   (b)     Pitta-aggravating factors  : excessive intake of sour, salty, fried foods and exces-
sive anger.   
   (c)     Kapha-aggravating factors  : excessive intake of sweet, oily food and a seden-
tary lifestyle.   
   (d)     Rakta-aggravating factors  : excessive intake of acid- or alkaline-containing 
foods, for example, fried or roasted foods, alcoholic beverages, and sour fruits. 
Excessive anger or severe emotional upset, sunbathing, or working under a 
scorching sun or near ﬁ  re and hot conditions are some other causes.   
   (e)     Mamsa-aggravating factors  : excessive use of exudative foods like meat, ﬁ  sh, 
yoghurt, milk, and cream. Behaviors leading to exudation, like sleeping during the 
day and overeating, are some of the causes of pathogen invasions of fatty tissues.   
   (f)     Medo-aggravating factors  : excessive intake of oily foods, sweets, and alcohol 
and a lazy attitude.    8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
86
8.4       Diet and Cancer Prevention 
 The relationship between diet and health has been recognized throughout recorded 
history. Dietary habits are one of the major contributory factors for the genesis of 
cancer. Diet, physical inactivity, and obesity are related to approximately 30–35 % 
of cancer deaths [ 30 ]. Physical inactivity is believed to contribute to cancer risk not 
only through its effect on body weight but also through negative effects on the 
immune and endocrine systems. Diets that are low in vegetables, fruits, and whole 
grains and high in processed or red meats are linked with a number of cancers. 
A high salt diet is linked to gastric cancer, aﬂ  atoxin B 1 , a frequent food contaminant, 
with liver cancer, and betel nut chewing with oral cancer [ 31 ]. 
 Surveys conducted in the USA have shown that cancer incidence is above 300 
cases per 100,000, whereas in Asian countries it is less than 100 cases per 100,000 
(Garodia et al. [ 29 ]). Also, although the incidence of cancer of the prostate, lung, 
breast, and colon is highest in Western countries, it is lowest in Eastern countries 
[ 32 – 34 ]. The reason for this high incidence of cancer in the USA is unclear; however, 
lifestyle has been thought to be one of the major contributors to the incidence of 
cancer. The higher incidence of cancer among immigrants from the East to the West 
further emphasizes the role of lifestyle [ 35 ,  36 ]. Additionally, diet is considered an 
important aspect of lifestyle related to cancer development [ 37 ]. While many dietary 
recommendations have been proposed to reduce the risk of cancer, few have signiﬁ  -
cant supporting scientiﬁ  c evidence [ 38 ]. The primary dietary factors that increase the 
risk of cancer are obesity and alcohol consumption, with a diet low in fruits and 
vegetables and high in red meat being implicated but not conﬁ  rmed [ 39 ]. Consumption 
of coffee is associated with a reduced risk of liver cancer [ 40 ]. Studies have linked 
the consumption of red or processed meat to an increased risk of breast cancer, colon 
cancer, and pancreatic cancer, a phenomenon that could be due to the presence of 
carcinogens in foods cooked at high temperatures [ 41 ,  42 ]. Thus, dietary recommen-
dations for cancer prevention typically include mainly vegetables, fruit, whole grains, 
and ﬁ  sh and a reduced intake of red meat, animal fat, and reﬁ  ned sugar [ 38 ]. 
 Disease prevention through the healthy preparation of foods and eating habits 
has been discussed in religious and civil writings    for thousands of years [ 14 ]. 
Since the nineteenth century, Western scientiﬁ  c methodologies have been applied 
to the study of diet and disease with the intent of reducing the disease b urden 
from noncommunicable diseases such as cancer , coronary heart disease, and other 
conditions endemic to societies after the advent of industrialization. Diet in India 
developed over thousands of years and is based on a mix of religious and secular 
beliefs. A large percentage of Indians, particularly Hindus, practice vegetarianism 
and avoid meat and ﬁ  sh products in their diet. Vegetarian diets have been associated 
with decreased risk of prostate cancer [ 43 ]. An impressive body of data exists in 
support of the concept that Indian food ingredients can be used in preventive strate-
gies aimed at reducing the incidence and mortality of different types of cancers 
because of their antioxidative, antimutagenic, and anticar cinogenic properties [ 44 ]. 
Case–control studies comparing nonvegetarian and veg etarian diets and alcohol 
and tobacco use in India have reported that vegetarians have a reduced risk of oral, S.K. Pal
87
esophageal, and breast cancers [ 14 ]. Vegetarian diets rely on pulses (e.g., beans, 
chickpeas, and lentils) as a source of protein, and pulses have been signiﬁ  cantly 
associated with reductions in cancer [ 45 ]. 
 Our knowledge of the transformation of a normal cell into a cancer cell has 
greatly expanded over the past decade. The simplistic, stepwise concept of initia-
tion, promotion, and progression has matured to a better understanding of the serial 
genotypic changes that ultimately lead to cancer [ 46 ]. Chemoprevention inhibits the 
development of invasive cancer either by blocking the DNA damage that initiates 
carcinogenesis or by arresting or reversing the progression of premalignant cells in 
which such damage has already occurred [ 47 ]. Many of the chemopreventive agents 
are antioxidants and might suppress carcinogenesis through (1) inhibiting Phase I 
enzymes, (2) inducing Phase II enzymes, (3) scavenging DNA reactive agents, (4) 
suppressing type-2 cell proliferation induced by carcinogens, or (5) inhibiting cer-
tain properties of neoplastic cells [ 48 ]. The Phase I detoxiﬁ  cation system, composed 
mainly of the cytochrome P450 supergene family of enzymes, is generally the ﬁ  rst 
enzymatic defense against foreign compounds. Most pharmaceuticals are metabo-
lized through Phase I biotransformation. Phase II conjugation reactions generally 
follow Phase I activation, resulting in a xenobiotic that has been transformed into a 
water-soluble compound that can be excreted through urine or bile. Several types of 
conjugation reactions are present in the body, including glucuronidation, sulfation, 
and glutathione and amino acid conjugation. These reactions require cofactors that 
must be replenished through dietary sources. The human diet contains a variety of 
compounds that exhibit chemoprevention effects toward an array of xenobiotics 
[ 49 ]. Epidemiology studies have suggested that some dietary constituents may act 
as naturally occurring cancer prevention agents and may explain some of the differ-
ences in cancer incidence seen in populations with varying dietary intakes [ 50 ,  51 ]. 
 Oxidative stress is one of the main ways in which DNA is damaged from either 
an exogenous or an endogenous source (e.g., inﬂ  ammation). Antioxidant micronu-
trients have been reported to oppose this effect [ 52 ]. Thus, food interacts in different 
ways with the initiation phase, and the protective effect of food is likely to be more 
important than food’s contribution as a mutagen. The promotion step is the clonal 
proliferation of mutated cells that occurs as a result of genetic alteration and epigen-
etic modulations and thus achieves tumor growth. Reactive oxygen species (ROSs) 
are necessary to intracell signaling for the synthesis of growth factor and antioxi-
dants that may interfere in this pathway. Little is known about the effect of food at 
the invasion step. Food can interfere with genetic and epigenetic alterations in this 
phase; for example, some experimental work suggests that dietary phenolic com-
pounds can modify angiogenesis [ 53 ]. 
 Chemoprevention by natural products has been obtained in several hundred ani-
mal studies [ 52 ]. Chemopreventive agents can be grouped into three broad catego-
ries [ 54 ]. The ﬁ  rst category is blocking agents. These compounds prevent 
carcinogenic agents from reaching or reacting with a critical target site; thus, they 
act by exerting a barrier function. The second category is composed of compounds 
that decrease the vulnerability of target tissue to carcinogenic stimuli. The third 
category is suppressing agents. These compounds prevent the evolution of neoplastic 
processes in tissue that otherwise would become malignant.  8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
88
8.5     Preventing Cancer by Dietary Modulation: 
Ayurvedic Viewpoint 
 Ayurveda promotes health by enlivening the body’s inner intelligence to create har-
mony [ 55 ]. Unlike modern nutritional theories, which tend to recommend “one size 
ﬁ ts all” guidelines that change with each new wave of research, Ayurvedic physi-
cians maintain there is no one single diet or food that is healthy for all individuals. 
Ayurveda identiﬁ  es six major tastes we need in our diet every day – sweet, sour, 
salty, pungent, bitter, and astringent. Each of these tastes has speciﬁ  c health-giving 
effects. By including all six, one can be most completely nourished. When we con-
sistently eat only a few of the tastes, it not only causes health problems but also 
triggers cravings for unhealthy foods. For instance, fast food contains mostly sweet, 
sour, and salty tastes. If we eat a steady diet of fast food, we can develop a craving 
for sweets. Adding more pungent, bitter, and astringent tastes can help tame an out-
of- control desire for fast foods. 
 Ayurvedic texts compare the process of digestion to cooking over a ﬂ  ame. 
Digestive “ﬁ  res,” collectively called  agni , “cook” food so that nutrients can be opti-
mally utilized. When  agni  is strong, our body fully assimilates nutrients and elimi-
nates what it doesn’t need. Ultimately a fully functioning digestive system uses the 
food we eat to produce a biochemical called  ojas , a ﬂ uid substance that nourishes 
the body and maintains the balance of all bodily systems. If the digestive ﬁ  re is 
weak, the incompletely digested portion of the meal forms a sticky, toxic substance 
called  ama . The opposite of  ojas ,  ama  blocks the ﬂ  ow of the body’s inner intelli-
gence. It settles in areas of the body that are out of balance, taking on many forms, 
such as calcium deposits in the joints, plaque in the arteries, and cysts and tumors. 
A coated tongue, bad breath, dullness of the senses, depression, and unclear think-
ing can indicate the presence of  ama . To prevent  ama  from forming, plenty of warm 
water should be taken and eating late at night should be avoided. Eating freshly 
prepared meals and cooking with seasonal, organic fruits and vegetables are essen-
tial. Strengthen  agni  by “kindling” it with heating foods and spices, such as ginger 
and black pepper. Every food has its own taste ( rasa ), a heating or cooling energy 
( virya  ), and a postdigestive effect ( vipaka  ). Some also possess  prabhava  , an unex-
plained effect. So while it is true that an individual’s  agni  largely determines how 
well or poorly food is digested, food combinations are also of great importance. 
Poor combinations can produce indigestion, fermentation, putrefaction, and gas 
 formation and, if prolonged, can lead to toxemia and disease [ 56 ]. 
 Ayurveda recommends strict dietary principles for maintaining healthy life. For 
example,  Satvika ahara   (fresh food composed of milk, fruits, and vegetables con-
sumed in a congenial environment), as recommended in  Gita , is considered whole-
some compared to  rajas   food (spicy, hot, fast food, acidic food) and  tamas   food and 
habits (stale food, alcohol, smoking, nonvegetarian food). We can deduce that  rajas   
and  tamas   foods may have a greater afﬁ  nity for developing malignancy compared 
to  satvika   foods.  S.K. Pal
89
8.6     Preventing Cancer with Vegetables, Fruits, Spices, 
and Herbs: The Contemporary Viewpoint 
 An interesting ﬁ  nding that has been observed repeatedly is that individuals who 
consume relatively large amounts of vegetables, fruits, grains, and herbs are at a 
decreased risk of cancer of many organs [ 52 ,  57 ]. An investigation by Block et al. 
[ 58 ] of 24 epidemiological studies showed that the consumption of a relatively large 
amount of vegetables and fruits was associated with a decreased incidence of lung 
cancer. Recent data from 11 cohort and case–control studies showed an inverse 
relationship between fruit and vegetable consumption and lung cancer [ 59 ]. Multiple 
mechanisms are undoubtedly involved in the protective effect of diets rich in fruits 
and vegetables [ 60 – 62 ]. However, it is difﬁ  cult to identify the relative contribution 
of various components of a plant-based food to overall cancer risk reduction. The 
issue is further complicated by the recent demonstration of synergism among pro-
tectors [ 63 ,  64 ]. Attention has been focused on intercellular signaling as a common 
molecular target for various chemopreventive phytochemicals [ 65 ]. 
 Natural products encompass three main categories of compounds, phenylpro-
panoids, isoprenoids, and alkaloids, which are widely distributed in plant foods and 
medicinal herbs. This large array of molecules is crucial to human nutrition and 
health. Plant-derived foodstuffs and beverages also constitute the so-called func-
tional foods and beverages, which include mainly fruits, vegetables, herbs, and 
spices [ 66 ]. Several plant constituents, including polyphenols, appear to be potent 
antimutagens and antioxidants [ 67 ]. Flavonoids and procyanidins are two major 
classes of polyphenolic phytochemicals demonstrating a wide range of biochemical 
and pharmacological effects. The ﬂ  avonoids, such as apigenin and quercetin, have 
been shown to inhibit melanoma growth and metastatic potential. When tested for 
the ability to inhibit lung colonization, these polyphenols decrease the number of 
B16-BL6 colonies in lung in a dose-dependent manner [ 68 ]. Dragsted et al. [ 69 ] 
found that polyphenols in fruits, vegetables, herbs, and spices inhibit tumor forma-
tion in experimental animals exposed to carcinogens. The role of dietary plant poly-
phenol has been emphasized in relation to health maintenance. The various 
polyphenols have been shown to possess antiatherogenic and anticarcinogenic 
properties, inhibiting the oxidative destruction of various oxylabel biological struc-
tures, inhibiting the processes of bioactivation of carcinogens, blocking LDL oxida-
tion, and stimulating the activity of antioxidant and detoxiﬁ  cation enzymes [ 70 ]. 
8.6.1     Vegetables and Cancer Prevention 
 The consumption of cruciferous vegetables such as cabbage, broccoli, Brussels 
sprouts, and cauliﬂ  ower has been shown to have cancer-chemoprevention effects in 
human and experimental animals [ 52 ,  71 ]. A striking and characteristic chemical 
property of cruciferous plants is their high content of glucosinolates, which often 
approaches 1 % or more of their dry weight. Glucosinolates and their isothiocyanate 8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
90
hydrolysis products are well-known protectors against carcinogenesis [ 72 ]. Indole-
3- carbinol, found in these cruciferous vegetables, has been shown to have a cancer- 
chemopreventive effect on liver, skin, colon, and mammary tissue when given 
before or concurrently with exposure to a carcinogen [ 71 ]. The topical application 
of indole-3-carbinol resulted in a signiﬁ  cant protection in 7,12-Dimethylbenz( α)
anthracene-initiated and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate   -promoted mouse 
skin carcinogenesis [ 73 ]. Lycopene, a natural antioxidant found predominantly in 
tomato, is also reported as a cancer-prevention agent. Serum and dietary lycopene 
levels have been found to be inversely related to the incidence of cancer. Although 
the antioxidant properties of lycopene are thought to be primarily responsible for its 
apparent beneﬁ  cial affects, other mechanisms may also be involved [ 74 ]. Alternative 
approaches focusing on the de velopment of tomato-based food products for human 
clinical trials targeting can cer prevention and as an adjunct to therapy have been 
planned [ 75 ]. The consumption of  Phaseolus vulgaris   bean species, such as pinto, 
black, navy, or kidney, may be beneﬁ  cial in the prevention and treatment of many 
chronic diseases including cancer [ 76 ]. 
 Soy foods are the major source of isoﬂ  avones, which are believed to play impor-
tant roles in the genesis of breast cancer and its progression. A prospective study 
conducted in China indicated that soy food intake is associated with longer survival 
and low recurrence among breast cancer patients [ 77 ]. Meta-analyses of epidemio-
logical studies of soy consumption and breast cancer risk have demonstrated modest 
protective effects. Moreover, concern has been expressed that the estrogenic activity 
of isoﬂ  avones may have adverse effects on breast cancer recurrence. Recent studies 
on the mechanisms of action of soy in breast cancer provide insights into the epigen-
etic effects and the interaction of isoﬂ  avones with IGF-1 and with a number of 
polymorphisms of genes associated with breast cancer risk such as MDM2 and 
CYP1B1. In particular, women who are at increased risk of breast cancer due to 
gene polymorphisms may beneﬁ  t from high soy isoﬂ  avone intake. Consumption of 
soy food has also been found to be associated with lower lung cancer risk [ 78 ,  79 ]. 
 From time immemorial, mushrooms have been valued by human beings as a 
culinary wonder and folk medicine in the East [ 80 ]. Mushrooms are considered a 
natural medicine that is widely used and recommended by Asian physicians and 
naturopaths for its supporting effects on the immune system. Laboratory research 
and a handful of preclinical trials have suggested that the nonedible Reishi mush-
room ( Ganoderma lucidum  ) carries promising anticancer and immunomodulatory 
properties [ 81 ]. Many other commonly consumed edible mushrooms, such as but-
ton mushrooms ( Agaricus bisporus  ), oyster mushrooms ( Pleurotus ostreatus  ), shii-
take mushrooms ( Lentinus edodes  ), and maitake mushrooms ( Grifola frondosa  ) 
might also play a role in cancer prevention [ 161 ].  
8.6.2     Fruits and Cancer Prevention 
  Emblica ofﬁ  cinalis   Gaertn. or  Phyllanthus emblica   Linn, commonly known as 
Indian gooseberry or amla, is arguably the most important medicinal plant in S.K. Pal
91
Ayurveda. Various parts of the plant are used to treat a range of diseases, but the 
most important is the fruit. Experimental studies have shown that amla and some of 
its phytochemicals, such as gallic acid, ellagic acid, pyrogallol, some norsesquiter-
penoids, corilagin, geraniin, elaeocarpusin, and prodelphinidins B1 and B2, also 
possess antineoplastic effects [ 82 ]. Amla is an important component of an Ayurvedic 
preparation called Triphala, which is made by combining three fruits –  Emblica 
ofﬁ  cinalis   Gaertn,  Terminalia chebula   Retz., and  Terminalia belerica   Retz. It is 
widely used as a colon cleanser, digestive, diuretic, and laxative. Experimental stud-
ies have shown that Triphala possesses antineoplastic, radioprotective, and chemo-
protective properties [ 83 ,  84 ]. Triphala has tumor-speciﬁ  c cytotoxicity and does not 
harm normal cells [ 85 ]. A recent study showed that Triphala could induce angiogen-
esis by suppressing vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 phosphorylation 
and, hence, have tumor-speciﬁ  c activity [ 86 ]. 
 Citrus fruits are essential foods in cancer prevention: for their capacity to act 
directly on cancerous cells as well as their potential for enhancing the anticancer 
effects of other phytochemical compounds present in diet [ 87 ,  88 ]. A growing body 
of evidence from human clinical trials has demonstrated that the consumption of 
grapes, wine, and grape juice exerts    many health-promoting and possibly anticancer 
effects [ 89 ]. The resveratrol present in red wine possesses powerful anticancer 
properties, which may be responsible for the beneﬁ  cial effects of wine on the 
prevention of certain cancers. Grape juice and cranberry juice contain resveratrol, 
but at levels ten times less than red wine. Grape seed polyphenols or procyanides 
are shown to have anticarcinogenic or antitumor promoting agents [ 90 ]. Several 
lines of evidence suggest that apples and apple products possess a wide range of 
biological activities that may contribute to beneﬁ  cial effects on one ʼs health against 
cardiovascular disease, asthma, and pulmonary dysfunction, diabetes, obesity, 
and cancer [ 91 ]. Apple products have been shown to prevent skin, mammary, and 
colon carcinogenesis in animal models. Epidemiological observations indicate that 
regular consumption of one or more apples a day may reduce the risk of lung and 
colon cancer [ 92 ]. 
 The anticancer activity of many other fruits, such as black plum ( Eugenia jam-
bolana   L.) [ 93 ], jackfruit ( Artocarpus heterophyllus  ) [ 94 ], mango ( Mangifera 
indica   L.) [ 95 ], plum ( Prunus domestica  ) [ 96 ], pineapple ( Ananas comosus  ) [ 97 ], 
prickly custard apple ( Annona muricata  ) [ 98 ], papaya ( Carica papaya  ) [ 99 ], pome-
granate ( Punica granatum  ) [ 100 ], strawberry [ 101 ], watermelon ( Citrullus lanatus   
T.) [ 102 ], guava ( Psidium guajava   L.) [ 103 ], and banana [ 104 ], was also veriﬁ  ed in 
in vitro experimental studies.  
8.6.3     Spices and Cancer Prevention 
 Hippocrates is frequently quoted as having said, “Let food be thy medicine and 
medicine be thy food.” Epidemiological, preclinical, and clinical studies continue to pro-
vide fundamental insights into the dynamic relationships between nutrients – deﬁ  ned 
here as any substance in the diet that brings about a physiological ef fect – and health. 8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
92
Today, claims about the ability of foods, including spices, to lower disease risk or to 
enhance the quality of life continue to captivate our attention [ 105 ]. Out of the thou-
sands of chemical structures that have been identiﬁ  ed in plant foods, many are found 
in spices. Typically, spices are the dried aromatic parts of plants – generally the 
seeds, berries, roots, pods, and sometimes leaves – that mainly, but not invariably, 
grow in hot countries [ 106 ]. Spices comprise an important component of our daily 
diets [ 107 ]. Indian spices have been known around the world since ancient times. 
Spices add aroma and taste to food and possess certain medicinal properties as well. 
Many spices, like turmeric, red chili, coriander, cumin, and mint, have been shown 
to cure diseases ranging from the common cold and cough to cancerous tumors 
[ 108 ]. Some spices are rich sources of ﬂ  avonoids, which can block carcinogenesis. 
For instance, the potential of turmeric (curcumin), red chilli (capsaicin), cloves 
(eugenol), ginger (zerumbone), garlic (diallyl sulﬁ  de), fennel (anethole), kokum 
(gambogic acid), fenugreek (diosgenin), and black cumin (thymoquinone) in cancer 
prevention has been established [ 109 ]. 
 When it comes to dealing with cancer, turmeric (Haridra) can be considered the 
king of spices. Turmeric contains the powerful polyphenol curcumin, or diferuloyl-
methan, which has been clinically proven to retard the growth of cancer cells caus-
ing prostrate cancer, melanoma, breast cancer, brain tumor, pancreatic cancer, and 
leukemia, among a host of others [ 110 ]. Various preclinical cell culture and animal 
studies suggest that curcumin has potential as an antiproliferative, anti-invasive, and 
antiangiogenic agent, as a mediator of chemoresistance and radioresistance, and as 
a chemopreventive agent [ 111 ,  112 ]. Curcumin promotes apoptosis, which safely 
eliminates cancer breeding cells without posing a threat to the development of other 
healthy cells. The various cell-signaling pathways inhibited by curcumin include 
NFκB, AP-1, STAT3, Akt, Bcl-2, Bcl-X(L), caspases, PARP, IKK, EGFR, HER2, 
JNK, MAPK, COX2, and 5-LOX [ 113 ]. Moreover, curcumin was reported to act in 
synergism with several natural compounds or synthetic agents commonly used in 
chemotherapy [ 114 ]. The results of a small number of clinical pilot studies 
conducted with curcumin at doses of up to 12 g suggest tentatively that it is safe in 
humans [ 115 ]. 
 The rhizomes of  Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale   Roscoe (Zingiberaceae), commonly known 
as ginger, is one of the most widely used spices and condiments. It is also an integral 
part of many traditional medicines and has been extensively used since ancient times 
in Ayurvedic, Chinese, Unani-Tibb   , Srilankan, Arabic, and African traditional medi-
cines  for many unrelated human ailments [ 116 ]. Ginger is an excellent source of 
several bioactive phenolics, including nonvolatile pungent compounds such as gin-
gerols, paradols, shogaols, and gingerones [ 117 ]. A number of preclinical investiga-
tions with a wide variety of assay systems and carcinogens have shown that ginger 
and its compounds possess chemopreventive and antineoplastic effects [ 118 – 120 ]. 
A number of mechanisms have been observed to be involved in the chemopreventive 
effects of ginger. The cancer-preventive activities of ginger are supposedly 
due mainly to free radical scavenging, antioxidant pathways, alterations of gene 
expression, and induction of apoptosis, all of which contribute to decreases in tumor 
initiation, promotion, and progression [ 116 ]. S.K. Pal
93
 The medicinal properties of garlic ( Allium sativum   L.) have been widely known 
and used since ancient times. Garlic enhances immune functions and has antibacte-
rial, antifungal, and antiviral activities [ 121 ]. In Ayurveda garlic is used for the 
treatment of various conditions like asthma, bronchitis, and chest congestion, skin 
diseases like leprosy, and skin conditions like leucoderma. A few Ayurvedic physi-
cians use garlic in repeated worm infections. Fresh and grounded garlic has been 
shown to inhibit cancer caused by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and nitrosa-
mines [ 122 ]. The protective effect of garlic has been attributed to the presence of 
organosulfur compounds like diallyl sulﬁ  de (DAS), diallyl disulﬁ  de (DADS), ajo-
ene, allixine, allyl mercaptans, and allyl methyl sulﬁ  des [ 123 ]. These compounds in 
garlic may give rise to its antibacterial properties, which in turn may block the for-
mation of cancer-causing substances, halt the activation of cancer-causing sub-
stances, enhance cell repair, reduce cell proliferation, or induce cell death [ 124 ]. 
Several population studies show an association between an increased intake of gar-
lic and a reduced risk of certain cancers, including cancers of the stomach, colon, 
esophagus, pancreas, and breast. Population studies are multidisciplinary studies of 
population groups that investigate the cause, incidence, or spread of a disease or 
examine the effect of health-related interventions, dietary and nutritional intakes, or 
environmental exposures. An analysis of data from seven population studies showed 
that the higher the amount of raw and cooked garlic consumed, the lower the risk of 
stomach and colorectal cancer [ 125 ]. A randomized clinical trial was conducted in 
China to evaluate the effect of synthetic allitridum (an extract of garlic used as a 
medicine in China for over 3,000 years) and selenium intake on gastric cancer risk 
involving over 5,000 Chinese men and women at high risk of stomach cancer. 
The study indicated that the risk for all tumors combined was reduced by 33 % and 
the risk of stomach cancer was reduced by 52 % in comparison with a group that 
received only a placebo [ 126 ]. 
 Clove ( Syzygium aromaticum  ) is one of the most commonly used spices in Indian 
kitchens [ 108 ]. It has been shown to be a potent chemopreventive agent and has 
been used by the traditional Ayurvedic healers of India since ancient times to treat 
respiratory and digestive ailments [ 127 ]. The major chemical constituents of clove 
include sesquiterpenes, volatile oil (eugenol), caryophyllene, tannins, and gum. The 
therapeutic beneﬁ  ts of eugenol are well known. It has been reported to participate 
in photochemical reactions and to possess insecticidal, antioxidant, and anti- 
inﬂ ammatory activities ( 162 ). Recent studies have also identiﬁ  ed the promising 
anticancer properties of clove [ 108 ]. Fennel seed ( Foeniculum vulgare  ) methanolic 
extract (FSME), studied in Swiss albino mice, was shown to possess antioxidant, 
cytotoxic, and antitumor potential. The FSME antitumor effect was due to the 
lipid peroxidation modulation that augmented the antioxidant defense system in 
Ehrlich ascites carcinoma-bearing mice with or without exposure to radiation [ 128 ]. 
The chemopreventive potential of fennel seed was also observed against DMBA-
induced skin carcinogenesis and benzo[a]pyrene-induced forestomach papilloma-
genesis in Swiss albino mice [ 129 ].  Nigella sativa   (NS), also known as black cumin, 
has been used as a traditional medicine for centuries. The crude oil and thymoqui-
none (TQ) extracted from its seeds and oil are effective against many diseases such 8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
94
as cardiovascular complications, diabetes, asthma, kidney problems, and cancer 
[ 130 ]. Studies conducted on SiHa human cervical cancer cells indicated that NS 
induced apoptosis in SiHa cells through both p53 and caspase activation [ 131 ]. A lot 
of research interest has been generated in the last decade on the chemopreventive 
effects of saffron on neoplastic cells, and experimental evidence    indicate anticar-
cinogenic and antitumor activities of saffron and its com pounds in vitro and 
in vivo platforms [ 132 ]. Cinnamon bark ( Cinnamomum cassia  ) is another popular 
herbal ingredient in traditional oriental medicine; it possesses diverse pharmaco-
logical activities including antibacterial, antiviral, and anticancer properties [ 133 ]. 
Research studies have suggested that the antitumor effect of cinnamon extracts is 
directly linked to enhanced proapoptotic activity and to the inhibition of NF κB and 
AP1 activities and their target genes in vitro and in vivo mouse melanoma models 
[ 134 ]. Cardamom, which belongs to the family Zingiberaceae, is one of the most 
common ingredients used in Indian cooking and in various parts of Europe [ 105 ]. 
As with many spices, cardamom, especially black cardamom ( Amomum subula-
tum ), has also been found to have  antioxidant properties. The ability of cardamom 
to inhibit chemical carcinogenesis was shown by Banerjee et al. [ 135 ]. It was 
observed that Swiss albino mice fed cardamom oil (10 μL daily for 2 weeks) expe-
rienced a signiﬁ  cant decrease in liver CYP content.  
8.6.4     Herbs and Cancer Prevention 
 Medical history since its beginnings is ﬁ  lled with descriptions of persons who used 
herbs to heal the sick of society. However, parallel to the onset of the industrial revo-
lution was the rise of allopathic medicine. Herbal medicine was also an effective 
healing method but was viewed less enthusiastically [ 136 ]. Botanical and herbal 
compounds have a substantial place in cancer treatment and palliation globally 
[ 137 ]. Dietary phytochemicals offer nontoxic therapeutic management as well as 
chemopreventive intervention for slow-growing cancers [ 118 ]. Various herbs are 
mentioned in the classic Ayurvedic texts for possessing potential anticancer proper-
ties. Sadabahar or  Catharanthus roseus  , commonly known as Madagascar periwin-
kle, has been used routinely for centuries in Ayurvedic medicine for the treatment 
of several diseases, including cancer. The two well-known chemotherapeutic agents 
vinblastine and vincristine are extracted from this plant, which is now used in the 
conventional treatment of leukemia and Hodgkin’s lymphoma [ 138 ,  139 ]. The ben-
eﬁ t of an herbal decoction is that it can nourish the body as a whole by supporting 
various organ systems [ 9 ] as they work on multiple biochemical pathways and are 
capable of inﬂ  uencing several organ systems simultaneously. Ayurvedic herbs can 
help in total healing and reduces side effects and cancer- associated complications 
[ 140 ]. Many herbs have been scientiﬁ  cally proven to have anticancer properties. 
A list of various herbs used for cancer treatment is given in Table  8.1 .
   Next to water, tea ( Camellia sinensis  ) is the cheapest beverage humans consume. 
Drinking tea has been considered a health-promoting habit since ancient times. S.K. Pal
95
   Table 8.1    Herbs and plants used in Ayurvedic    anticancer treatment   
 Scientiﬁ  c name  Sanskrit/Hindi name  English name 
  Abrus precatorius    Gunja  Coral bead vine 
  Agati grandiﬂ  ora    Gaach-munga  Hummingbird tree 
  Albizzia lebbeck    Sirisha  Rain tree 
  Allium sativum    Lasuna  Garlic 
  Aloe vera    Kumari  Aloe 
  Alstonia scholaries    Sapta parni  Milky pine 
  Amorphopallus campanulatus    Jimikand  Elephant foot yam 
  Amura rohitaka    Harinkhana  Rohituka tree 
  Anacardium occidentale    Kajutaka  Cashew 
  Anona squamosa    Sitaphala  Custard apple 
  Annona atemoya    Sugar apple 
  Aristolochia indica    Ishwari  Birthwort 
  Asparagus racemosa    Shatawari  Asparagus 
  Azadiracta indica    Nimba  Margosa tree 
  Bacopa monnieri    Brahmi  Indian penny wort 
  Baliospermum montanum    Hastidanti  Wild castor 
  Barleria prionitis    Kuranta  Porcupine ﬂ  ower 
  Basella rubra    Pui Ki sag  Ceylon spinach 
  Bauhinia racemosa    Kanchanara  Mountain ebony 
  Berberis aristata    Daru haridra  Indian ophthalmic barberry 
  Berginia ligulata    Prashanbheda  Winter begonia 
  Boswellia serrata    Shallaki  Indian olibanum 
  Calotropis gigantean    Arka  Gigantic swallow wort 
  Caesalpinia sappa    Baka  Sappanwood 
  Capparis spinosa    Himsra  Caper 
  Capparis sepiaria    Kanthari  Wild caper bush 
  Cassia ﬁ  stula    Bandarlauri  Golden shower tree 
  Cedrus deodara    Devadaru  Devdar 
  Centella asiatica    Mandukaparni  Gotu kola 
  Curcuma longa    Haridra  Turmeric 
  Cymbopogon citrates    Bhustrina  Lemongrass 
  Datura metal    Dhattura  Angel’s trumpet 
  Elephantopus scaber    Mayura-shikhaa  Elephant’s foot 
  Euphoria hirta    Dugdhika  Hairy spurge 
  Euphorbia neriifolia    Sehund  Indian spurge tree 
  Ficus bengalensis    Bargad  Banyan 
  Ficus glomerata    Udumbara  Goolar ﬁ  g 
  Flacourtia romontchi    Vikankata  Indian plum    
  Gynandropis pentaphylla    Hurhur  Spider ﬂ  ower 
  Heliotropium indicum    Hathsura  Indian heliotrope 
  Holarrhena antidysenterica    Kutaja  Kurchi tree 
  Hygrophila spinosa    Gokulakanta  Hydrophilia 
  Inula cappa    Gaaitihaare  Sheep’s ear 
  Ixora undulata    Kukurajihva  West Indian jasmine 
  Jasminum auriculatum    Juuhi  Jasmine 
  Juniperus indica    Hapusha  Black juniper 
(continued)8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
96
 Scientiﬁ  c name  Sanskrit/Hindi name  English name 
  Lagenaria vulgaris    Lauki  Bottle gourd 
  Leea macrophylla    Hathikana  Dinda 
  Luffa cylindrical    Ghia torai  Sponge gourds 
  Madhuca indica    Mahua  Butter tree 
  Mallotus philippensis    Kamala  Kamala tree 
  Manilkara hexandra    Khirni  Ceylon iron wood 
  Melia azadirachta    Maha nimba  Neem tree 
  Moringa oleifera    Shigru  Horseradish tree 
  Musa sapientum    Kela  Banana 
  Nerium indicum    Kara veera  Oleander 
  Nigella sativa    Krishna jeeraka  Black cumin 
  Occimum sanctum    Tulasi  Holy basil 
  Oxoxylum indicum    Bhut-vriksha  Midnight horror 
  Pandanus odoratissimum    Kevada  Screw pine 
  Paederia foetida    Gandha prasarani  Chinese fever vine 
  Phyllantus fraternus    Niruri  Leafﬂ  ower 
  Picrorrhiza kurroa    Katuki  Kutki 
  Piper betle    Nagavalli  Betel leaf pepper 
  Piper longum    Pippali  Indian long pepper 
  Pisum sativum    Kalaya  Garden pea 
  Plumbago zeylanica    Chitraka  Leadwort 
  Plumbago rosea    Rakta chiktraka  Radix plumbago 
  Podophyllum hexandrum    Ban kakari  Himalayan mayapple 
  Pongamia glabra    Karanja  Indian beech 
  Prosopis cineraria    Khejri/shami  Prosopis 
  Pterospermum acerifolium    Muchukunda  Maple-leaved bayur tree 
  Rubia cordifolia    Manjistha  Indian madder 
  Saussurea lappa    Kustha  Costus root 
  Saraca indica    Ashoka  Ashoka tree 
  Semecarpus anacardium    Bhallataka  Varnish tree 
  Sinapis dichotoma    Serson  Indian rape 
  Solanum xanthocarpum    Choti Katheri  Yellow-berried nightshade 
  Soymida febrifuga    Raktarohan  Indian redwood 
  Syzygium cumini    Jamun  Black plum 
  Symplocos racemosa    Lodhra  Lodh tree 
  Taxus buccata    Talispatr  Himalayan yew 
  Tectona grandis    Sagon  Teak 
  Tinospora cordifolia    Guduchi  Indian tinospora 
  Terminalia arjun    Arjun  White marudah 
  Terminalia chebula    Harra  Chebulic myrobalan 
  Tylophora asthmatica    Aja dweshi  Indian ipecac 
  Vernonia species    Sahadevi  Ironweed 
  Vitis vinifera    Draksha  Grape 
  Vinca rosea    Sadabahar  Periwinkle 
  Withania somnifera    Ashwagandha  Indian ginseng 
  Xantium strumarium    Chota dhatura  Burdock datura 
  Source : Garodia et al. [ 29 ], Balachandran and Govindarajan [ 9 ], Smit et al. [ 140 ] 
 Names in  boldface   represent plants whose anticancer activity is supported by experimental research  Table 8.1  (continued)S.K. Pal
97
Encouraging data showing the cancer-preventing effects of green tea from cell 
cultures and animal and human studies have emerged. Evidence is accumulating 
that black tea may have similar beneﬁ  cial effects [ 141 ]. The prophylactic and thera-
peutic properties of tea have been attributed to green tea catechins and black tea 
theaﬂ  avins, besides several other polyphenolic compounds such as thearubigins, 
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), epicatechin (EC), gallic acid (GA), gallocatechin 
(GC), catechin gallate (CG), gallocatechin gallate (GCG), epicatechin gallate 
(ECG), and epigallocatechin (EGC), in addition to a certain amount of caffeic acid 
and proteins [ 142 ,  143 ,  144 ]. Recent studies show the inhibitory effects of EGCG 
on the growth of existing tumors, including breast cancer, skin cancer, ovarian, 
esophageal, and gastrointestinal tract cancers [ 145 – 148 ]. Another mode of action of 
biologically active compounds in green tea involves inhibiting the neoplastic 
process (initiation, promotion, and progress). Several independent factors, such as 
beverage temperature, duration of consumption, amount of tea consumed, and diet 
intake, have a decisive effect on the ﬁ  nal outcome of plant polyphenols in the 
process of carcinogenesis [ 145 ]. 
 For thousands of years, Ayurvedic physicians and laypeople have observed the 
beneﬁ  cial effects of using so-called Holy Basil or Tulsi ( Ocimum sanctum  ). Modern 
research and clinical studies have conﬁ  rmed dozens of Holy Basil’s traditional 
known actions and therapeutic uses including its remarkable adaptogenic and anti-
stress activities, as well as its power support for the immune system. Recent studies 
have also established that Tulsi also has remarkable anticancer activity [ 149 ]. 
Extracts of  O. sanctum   leaves inhibit the proliferation, migration, and invasion and 
induce the apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro [ 150 ]. The action of the 
novel ﬂ  avonoid vicenin-2 (VCN-2), an active constituent of Tulsi, was studied in 
prostate carcinoma (CaP) cell lines. It was found that VCN-2 effectively induced 
antiproliferative, antiangiogenic, and proapoptotic effects in CaP cells (PC-3, 
DU-145, and LNCaP) irrespective of their androgen responsiveness or p53 status. 
VCN-2 inhibited the EGFR/Akt/mTOR/p70S6K pathway while decreasing c-Myc, 
cyclin D1, cyclin B1, CDK4, PCNA, and hTERT in vitro [ 151 ]. 
  Azadirachta indica  , commonly known as neem, has a wide range of medicinal 
properties [ 152 ]. Because of its tremendous therapeutic, domestic, agricultural, and 
ethnomedicinal signiﬁ  cance    and its proximity to human culture and civilization, 
neem has been called “the wonder tree” and “nature’s drugstore.” All parts of this 
tree, particularly the leaves, bark, seed oil, and their puriﬁ  ed products, are widely 
used in the treatment of cancer. Over 60 different types of biochemicals, including 
terpenoids and steroids, have been puriﬁ  ed from this plant. Preclinical research 
done over the last decade has ﬁ  ne-tuned our understanding of the anticancer proper-
ties of the crude and puriﬁ  ed products from this plant. The anticancer properties of 
the plant have been studied largely in terms of its preventive, protective, tumor- 
suppressive, immunomodulatory, and apoptotic effects against various types of can-
cer and their molecular mechanisms [ 153 ]. Neem extracts and its puriﬁ  ed products 
have been examined for the induction of apopto sis in multiple cancer cell types; 
however, its underlying mechanisms remain undeﬁ  ned [ 152 ]. Thirty-ﬁ  ve limonoids, 
including 15 of the azadiradione type (1–15), 5 of the gedunin type (16–20), 4 of the 
azadirachtin type (21–24), 9 of the nimbin type (25–33), and 2 degraded limonoids 8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
98
(34, 35), isolated from Azadirachta indica seed extracts, were evaluated for their 
cytotoxic activities against 5 human cancer cell lines. Seven compounds (3, 6, 7, 16, 
18, 28, and 29) exhibited cytotoxic activity against one or more cell lines. Among 
these compounds, 7-deacetyl-7-benzoylepoxyazadiradione (7), 7-deacetyl-7- 
benzoylgeduin (18), and 28-deoxonimbolide (28) exhibited potent cytotoxic activ-
ity against HL60 leukemia cells, with IC(50) values in the range 2.7–3.1 μM [ 154 ]. 
Neem leaf preparation (NLP) was found to activate natural killer (NK) cells 
[CD56(+)CD3(−)] to enhance their c ytotoxic abil ity to kill tumor cells and stimu-
late the release of interleukin-12 (IL-12) from macrophages from healthy individu-
als and head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma patients [ 155 ]. The anticancer 
properties of neem have been reported in many cell lines studies [ 156 – 158 ].   
8.7     Conclusions 
 The ancient Ayurvedic text  Sushrita Samhita   states, “He whose  doshas   are in bal-
ance, whose appetite is good…whose body, mind, and senses remain full of bliss, is 
called a healthy person.” By following these simple, time-tested Ayurvedic dietary 
principles in our daily lives, one can enhance good health and keep cancer away. 
The disease-preventive and health-promotion approach of Ayurveda takes into con-
sideration the whole body, mind, and spirit while maintaining health, and its 
approach to promoting health and treating ailments is holistic and is now ﬁ  nding 
increasing acceptance in many regions of the world. Ancient Ayurvedic physicians 
developed certain dietary and therapeutic measures to arrest/delay aging and rejuve-
nate whole functional dynamics of the body [ 159 ]. The Ayurvedic system of medi-
cine prescribes more than 700 plant-based medicines, strict dietary principles, and 
yoga to encourage good health. Hundreds of bioactive chemical compounds have 
been identiﬁ  ed in plant foods. Consuming a diet rich in plant foods will provide a 
milieu of phytochemicals, nonnutritive substances that possess health-protective 
beneﬁ  ts [ 160 ]. Hence, embracing a cuisine rich in vegetables, fruits, spices, and 
herbs will enhance the chemopreventive capacity of one’s diet. The prevention of 
cancer through food is a better option than toxic cancer treatment. A proper healthy 
and balanced diet can deﬁ  nitely prevent or delay the onset of cancer. Urgent atten-
tion is thus required to scientiﬁ  cally reevaluate the Ayurvedic concept of food-based 
cancer prevention and management.     
      References 
    1.    Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A (2013) Cancer statistics, 2013. CA Cancer J Clin 
63:11–30  
    2.    Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D (2011) Global cancer statistics. 
CA Cancer J Clin 61(2):69–90  
    3.    Chung MY , Lim TG, Lee KW (2013) Molecular mechanisms of chemopreventive phytochem-
icals against gastroenterological cancer development. World J Gastroenterol 19(7):984–993  S.K. Pal
99
    4.    Wang JB, Jiang Y , Liang H, Li P, Xiao HJ, Ji J, Xiang W, Shi JF, Fan YG, Li L, Wang D, Deng 
SS, Chen WQ, Wei WQ, Qiao YL, Boffetta P (2012) Attributable causes of cancer in China. Ann Oncol 23(11):2983–2989  
      5.    Anand P, Kunnumakkara AB, Kunnumakara AB, Sundaram C, Harikumar KB, Tharakan ST, 
Lai OS, Sung B, Aggarwal BB (2008) Cancer is a preventable disease that requires major lifestyle changes. Pharm Res 25(9):2097–2116  
    6.    Dolara P, Bigagli E, Collins A (2012) Antioxidant vitamins and mineral supplementation, life 
span expansion and cancer incidence: a critical commentary. Eur J Nutr 51(7):769–781  
    7.   Syed DN, Chamcheu JC, Mukhtar VM (2013) Pomegranate extracts and cancer prevention: 
molecular and cellular activities. Anticancer Agents Med Chem 13(8):1149–1161  
    8.    Pal D, Banerjee S, Ghosh AK (2012) Dietary-induced cancer prevention: an expanding 
research arena of emerging diet related to healthcare system. J Adv Pharm Technol Res 3(1):16–24  
          9.    Balachandran P, Govindarajan R (2005) Cancer – an ayurvedic perspective. Pharmacol Res 
51:19–30  
    10.    Patel D, Mansoori A (2012) Cancer – an ayurvedic perspective. IJARPB 2(2):179–195      11.    Chopra A, Doiphode VV (2002) Ayurvedic medicine, core concept, therapeutic principles, 
and current relevance. Complement Alternat Med 86:75–89  
    12.    Murthy KRS (2005) Sushruta Samhita (700 BC). Choukhamba Orientalia, Varanasi       13.    Sharma PV (1981) Charaka Samhita. Choukhamba Orientalia, Varanasi        14.    Sinha R, Anderson DE, McDonald SS, Greenwald P (2003) Cancer risk and diet in India. 
J Postgrad Med 49:222–228  
    15.    Kinzler KW, V ogelstein B (eds) (2002) The genetic basis of human cancer, 2nd edn. McGraw- 
Hill/Medical Pub., New York, Division, p 5  
    16.    Croce CM (2008) Oncogenes and cancer. N Engl J Med 358(5):502–511      17.    Sherr CJ (2004) Principles of tumor suppression. Cell 116(2):235–246      18.    Lodish H, Berk A, Matsudaira P, Kaiser CA, Krieger M, Scott MP, Zipursky SL, Darnell J 
(eds) (2004) Molecular biology of the cell, 5th edn. WH Freeman, New York, p 963  
    19.    Risau W, Flamme I (1995) Vasculogenesis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 11:73–91      20.    Flamme I, Frölich T, Risau W (1997) Molecular mechanisms of vasculogenesis and embry-
onic angiogenesis. J Cell Physiol 173(2):206–210  
    21.    Gupta PB, Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA (2009) Cancer stem cells: mirage or reality? Nat Med 
15(9):1010–1012  
    22.    Matsui W, Wang Q, Barber JP et al (2008) Clonogenic multiple myeloma progenitors, stem 
cell properties, and drug resistance. Cancer Res 68(1):190–197  
    23.       Henderson BE, Bernstein L, Ross RK et al (2000) Hormones and the etiology of cancer. In: 
Bast RC, Kufe DW, Pollock RE (eds) Holland-Frei cancer medicine, 5th edn. B. C. Decker, Hamilton  
    24.    Sasco AJ, Secretan MB, Straif K (2004) Tobacco smoking and cancer: a brief review of 
recent epidemiological evidence. Lung Cancer 45(Suppl 2):S3–S9  
    25.    Biesalski HK, Bueno de Mesquita B, Chesson A, Chytil F, Grimble R, Hermus RJ, Köhrle J, 
Lotan R, Norpoth K, Pastorino U, Thurnham D (1998) European consensus statement on lung cancer: risk factors and prevention. Lung cancer panel. CA Cancer J Clin 48(3):167–176  
    26.    Singh RH (2002) An assessment of the ayurvedic concept of cancer and a new paradigm of 
anticancer treatment in ayurveda. J Alternat Complement Med 8(5):609–614  
    27.    Thatte U, Dhahanukar S (1991) Ayurveda, the natural alternative. Sci Today 2001:12–18      28.    Dash B, Kashyap L (1987) Diagnosis and treatment of Galaganda, Gandamala, apaci, granthi 
and arbuda. Concept Publishing Company, New Delhi  
        29.    Garodia P, Ichikawa H, Malani N, Sethi G, Aggarwal BB (2007) From ancient medicine to 
modern medicine: ayurvedic concept of health and their role in inﬂ  ammation and cancer. 
J Soc Integr Oncol 5(1):25–37  
    30.    Abdulla M, Gruber P (2000) Role of diet modiﬁ  cation in cancer prevention. Biofactors 
12(1–4):45–51  8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
100
    31.    Park S, Bae J, Nam BH, Yoo KY (2008) Aetiology of cancer in Asia. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 
9(3):371–380  
    32.    Haenszel W, Kurihara M (1968) Studies of Japanese migrants. I. Mortality from cancer and 
other diseases among Japanese in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst 40:43–68  
   33.    Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J et al (2005) Global cancer statistics 2002. CA Cancer J Clin 
55:74–108  
    34.    Ziegler RG, Hoover RN, Pike MC et al (1993) Migration patterns and breast cancer risk in 
Asian-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 85:1819–1827  
    35.    Kolonel LN, Altshuler D, Henderson BE (2004) The multiethnic cohort study: exploring 
genes, lifestyle and cancer risk. Nat Rev Cancer 4:519–527  
    36.   Wong AH, Gottesman II, Petronis A (2005) Phenotypic differences in genetically identical 
organisms: the epigenetic perspective. [Special issue] Hum Mol Genet 14(1):R11–18  
    37.    Tjønneland A, Olsen A, Boll K, Stripp C, Christensen J, Engholm G, Overvad K (2007) 
Study design, exposure variables, and socioeconomic determinants of participation in diet, 
cancer and health: a population-based prospective cohort study of 57,053 men and women in 
Denmark. Scand J Public Health 35:432–441  
     38.   Cappellani A, Di Vita M, Zanghi A, Cavallaro A, Piccolo G, Veroux M, Berretta M, 
Malaguarnera M, Canzonieri V , Lo Menzo E (2012) Diet, obesity and breast cancer: an 
update. Front Biosci (Scholar edition) 4:90–108  
    39.    Key TJ (2011) Fruit and vegetables and cancer risk. Brit J Cancer 104(1):6–11  
    40.    Larsson SC, Wolk A (2007) Coffee consumption and risk of liver cancer: a meta-analysis. 
Gastroenterology 132(5):1740–1745  
    41.    Ferguson LR (2010) Meat and cancer. Meat Sci 84(2):308–313  
    42.    Zheng W, Lee SA (2009) Well-done meat intake, heterocyclic amine exposure, and cancer 
risk. Nutr Cancer 61(4):437–446  
    43.    Rajaram S, Sabate J (2000) Health beneﬁ  ts of a vegetarian diet. Nutrition 16:531–533  
    44.    Sengupta A, Ghosh S, Bhattacharjee S, Das S (2004) Indian food ingredients and cancer 
prevention – an experimental evaluation of anticarcinogenic effects of garlic in rat colon. 
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 5(2):126–132  
    45.    Jain MG, Hislop GT, Howe GR, Ghadirian P (1999) Plant foods, antioxidants, and prostate 
cancer risk: ﬁ  ndings from case–control studies in Canada. Nutr Cancer 34:173–184  
    46.    Bishop MJ (1991) Molecular themes in oncogenesis. Cell 64:235–248  
    47.    Hong WK, Sporn MB (1997) Recent advances in chemoprevention of cancer. Science 
278:1073–1077  
    48.    Tanaka T, Kohno H, Mori H (2001) Chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by dietary 
non-nutritive compounds. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 3:165–177  
    49.    Shukla Y , Arora A, Taneja P (2003) Antigenotoxic potential of certain dietary constituents. 
Teratog Carcinog Mutagen 23(Suppl 1):323–335  
    50.    Willett WC, MacMohan B (1984) Diet and cancer – an overview (ﬁ  rst of the two parts). 
N Engl J Med 310:633–638  
    51.    Willett WC, MacMohan B (1984) Diet and cancer – an overview (second of the two parts). 
N Engl J Med 310:697–703  
       52.    Shukla Y , Pal SK (2004) Dietary cancer chemoprevention: an overview. Int J Hum Genet 
4(4):265–276  
    53.    Gerber M (2001) The comprehensive approach to diet: a critical review. J Nutr 
131:3051S–3055S  
    54.    Wattenberg LW (1997) An overview of chemoprevention: current status and future prospect. 
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 216:133–144  
    55.   Hospodar M (2013) The dosha balancing diet.   http://www.yogajournal.com/health/646    . 
Accessed 28 November 2013  
    56.    Lad V (1997) Food combination. In: Lad U, Lad V (eds) Ayurveda cooking for self-healing. 
The Ayurvedic Press, Albuquerque  
    57.    Park EJ, Pezzuto JM (2002) Botanicals in cancer chemoprevention. Can Metas Rev 21:231–255  S.K. Pal
101
    58.    Block G, Patterson B, Subar A (1992) Fruits, vegetables and cancer prevention: a review of 
the epidemiological evidence. Nutr Cancer 18:1–29  
    59.    Koutsokera A, Kiagia M, Saif MW, Souliotis K, Syrigos KN (2013) Nutrition habits, physical 
activity, and lung cancer: an authoritative review. Clin Lung Cancer 14(4):342–350  
    60.    Steinmetz KA, Potter JD (1991) Vegetables, fruits, and cancer. I. Epidemiology. Cancer 
Causes Control 2:325–357  
   61.    Steinmetz KA, Potter JD (1991) Vegetables, fruits, and cancer. II. Mechanisms. Cancer 
Causes Control 2:427–442  
    62.    Steinmetz KA, Potter JD (1996) Vegetables, fruits, and cancer prevention: a review. J Am 
Diet Assoc 96:1027–1039  
    63.    Brenner DE (2000) Multiagent chemoprevention agent combinations. J Cell Biochem 
34(Suppl):121–124  
    64.    Torrance CJ, Jackson PE, Montgomery E, Kinzler KW, V ogelstein B, Wissner A, Nunes M, 
Frost P, Discafani CM (2000) Combinatorial chemoprevention of intestinal neoplasia. Nat Med 6:1024–1028  
    65.    Surh YJ (2003) Cancer chemoprevention with dietary phytochemicals. Nat Rev Cancer 
10:768–680  
    66.    Bajbouj K, Schulze-Luehrmann J, Diermeier S, Amin A, Schneider-Stock R (2012) The anti-
cancer effect of saffron in two p53 isogenic colorectal cancer cell lines. BMC Complement Alternat Med 12:69–77  
    67.    Ren W, Qiao Z, Wang H, Zhu L, Zhang L (2003) Flavonoids: promising anticancer agents. 
Med Res Rev 4:519–534  
    68.    Caltagirone S, Rossi C, Poggi A, Ranelletti FO, Natali PG, Brunetti M, Aiollo FB, Piantelli 
M (2000) Flavonoids apigenin and quercetin inhibit melanoma growth and metastatic poten-tial. Int J Cancer 87:595–600  
    69.    Dragsted LO, Strube M, Leth T (1997) Dietary levels of plant phenols and other non-nutritive 
components: could they prevent cancer? Eur J Cancer Prev 6:522–528  
    70.    Zloch Z (1996) The role of dietary plant polyphenols in health maintenance. Cas Lek Cesk 
135:84–88  
     71.    Kim DJ, Shin DH, Ahn B, Kang JS, Nam KT, Park CB, Kim CK, Hong JT et al (2003) 
Chemoprevention of colon cancer by Korean food plant components. Mutat Res 523–524:99–107  
    72.    Talalay P, Fahey JW (2001) Phytochemicals from cruciferous plant protects against cancer by 
modulating carcinogen metabolism. J Nutr 131:3027S–3033S  
    73.    Srivastava B, Shukla Y (1998) Antitumour promoting activity of indole-3-carbinol in mouse 
skin carcinogenesis. Cancer Lett 134:91–96  
    74.    Hwang ES, Bowen PE (2002) Can the consumption of tomatoes for lycopene reduce cancer 
risk? Integr Cancer Ther 2:121–132  
    75.    Tan H, Thomas-Ahner J, Grainger E, Wan L, Francis D, Schwartz S, Erdman J, Clinton S, 
Hsueh-Li T (2010) Tomato-based food products for prostate cancer prevention: what have we learned? Cancer Metastasis Rev 29(3):553–568  
    76.    Hutchins AM, Winham DM, Thompson SV (2012) Phaseolus beans: impact on glycaemic 
response and chronic disease risk in human subjects. Br J Nutr 108(Suppl 1):S52–S65  
    77.    Magee PJ, Rowland I (2012) Soy products in the management of breast cancer. Curr Opin 
Clin Nutr Metab Care 15(6):586–591  
    78.    Yang G, Shu XO, Chow WH, Zhang X, Li HL, Ji BT, Cai H, Wu S, Gao YT, Zheng W (2012) 
Soy food intake and risk of lung cancer: evidence from the Shanghai women’s health study and a meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol 176(10):846–855  
    79.    Yang WS, Va P, Wong MY , Zhang HL, Xiang YB (2011) Soy intake is associated with lower 
lung cancer risk: results from a meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies. Am J Clin Nutr 94(6):1575–1583  
    80.    Patel S, Goyal A (2012) Recent developments in mushrooms as anti-cancer therapeutics: a 
review. Biotech 2(1):1–15  8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
102
    81.    Batra P, Sharma AK, Khajuria R (2013) Probing Lingzhi or Reishi medicinal mushroom 
 Ganoderma lucidum   (higher Basidiomycetes): a bitter mushroom with amazing health ben-
eﬁ ts. Int J Med Mushrooms 15(2):127–143  
    82.    Baliga MS, Dsouza JJ (2011) Amla ( Emblica ofﬁ  cinalis   Gaertn), a wonder berry in the treat-
ment and prevention of cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 20(3):225–239  
    83.    Baliga MS (2010) Triphala ayurvedic formulation for treating and preventing cancer: a 
review. J Altern Complement Med 16(12):1301–1308  
    84.    Kaur S, Michael H, Arora S, Härkönen PL, Kumar S (2005) The in vitro  cytotoxic and apop-
totic activity of Triphala-an Indian herbal drug. J Ethnopharmacol 97(1):15–20  
    85.    Sandhya T, Lathika KM, Pandey BN, Mishra KP (2006) Potential of traditional ayurvedic 
formulation, Triphala, as a novel anticancer drug. Cancer Lett 231(2):206–214  
    86.    Lu K, Chakroborty D, Sarkar C, Lu T, Xie Z, Liu Z, Basu S (2012) Triphala and its active 
constituent chebulinic acid are natural inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor-a 
mediated angiogenesis. PLoS One 7(8):e43934  
    87.    Kim J, Jayaprakasha GK, Patil BS (2013) Limonoids and their anti-proliferative and anti- 
aromatase properties in human breast cancer cells. Food Funct 4(2):258–265  
    88.    Meiyanto E, Hermawan A, Anindyajati (2012) Natural products for cancer-targeted 
therapy: citrus ﬂ  avonoids as potent chemopreventive agents. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 
13(2):427–436  
    89.    Zhou K, Raffoul JJ (2012) Potential anticancer properties of grape antioxidants. J Oncol 
2012:803294  
    90.    Zhao J, Wang J, Chen Y , Agarwal R (1999) Anti-tumor promoting activity of a polyphenolic 
fraction isolated from grape seeds in the mouse skin two stage initiation promotion protocol 
and identiﬁ  cation of procyanidin B 5-3 ′-gallate as the most effective antioxidant constituent. 
Carcinogenesis 20:1737–1745  
    91.    He X, Wang Y , Hu H, Zhang Z (2012) In vitro  and in vivo  antimammary tumor activities and 
mechanisms of the apple total triterpenoids. J Agric Food Chem 60(37):9430–9436  
    92.    Gerhauser C (2008) Cancer chemopreventive potential of apples, apple juice, and apple com-
ponents. Planta Med 74(13):1608–1624  
    93.    Baliga MS (2011) Anticancer, chemopreventive and radioprotective potential of black plum 
( Eugenia jambolana   lam). Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 12(1):3–15  
    94.    Arung ET, Shimizu K, Kondo R (2007) Structure-activity relationship of prenyl-substituted 
polyphenols from  Artocarpus heterophyllus   as inhibitors of melanin biosynthesis in cultured 
melanoma cells. Chem Biodivers 4(9):2166–2171  
    95.    García-Rivera D, Delgado R, Bougarne N, Haegeman G, Berghe WV (2011) Gallic acid 
indanone and mangiferin xanthone are strong determinants of immunosuppressive anti- 
tumour effects of  Mangifera indica   L. bark in MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells. Cancer Lett 
305(1):21–31  
    96.    Yu MH, Im HG, Kim HI, Lee IS (2009) Induction of apoptosis by immature plum in human 
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Med Food 12(3):518–527  
    97.    Bhui K, Tyagi S, Prakash B, Shukla Y (2010) Pineapple bromelain induces autophagy, facili-
tating apoptotic response in mammary carcinoma cells. Biofactors 36(6):474–482  
    98.    Torres MP, Rachagani S, Purohit V , Pandey P, Joshi S, Moore ED, Johansson SL, Singh PK, 
Ganti AK, Batra SK (2012) Graviola: a novel promising natural-derived drug that inhibits 
tumorigenicity and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro  and in vivo  through altering 
cell metabolism. Cancer Lett 323(1):29–40  
    99.    Nguyen TT, Shaw PN, Parat MO, Hewavitharana AK (2013) Anticancer activity of  Carica 
papaya  : a review. Mol Nutr Food Res 57(1):153–164  
    100.   Shirode AB, Kovvuru P, Chittur SV , Henning SM, Heber D, Reliene R (2013) Antiproliferative 
effects of pomegranate extract in MCF-7 breast cancer cells are associated with reduced DNA 
repair gene expression and induction of double strand breaks. Mol Carcinog. doi:   10.1002/
mc.21995      
    101.    Somasagara RR, Hegde M, Chiruvella KK, Musini A, Choudhary B, Raghavan SC (2012) 
Extracts of strawberry fruits induce intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in breast cancer cells and 
inhibits tumor progression in mice. PLoS One 7(10):e47021  S.K. Pal
103
    102.    Abdelwahab SI, Hassan LE, Abdul Majid AM, Yagi SM, Mohan S, Elhassan Taha MM, 
Ahmad S, Chuen CS, Narrima P, Rais MM, Syam S, Moharam BA, Hadi AH (2012) Cucurbitacin L 2-O- β-glucoside demonstrates apoptogenesis in colon adenocarcinoma cells 
(HT-29): involvement of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species regulation. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2012:490136  
    103.    Bontempo P, Doto A, Miceli M, Mita L, Benedetti R, Nebbioso A, Veglione M, Rigano D, 
Ciofﬁ   M, Sica V , Molinari AM, Altucci L (2012)  Psidium guajava   L. anti-neoplastic effects: 
induction of apoptosis and cell differentiation. Cell Prolif 45(1):22–31  
    104.    Deneo-Pellegrini H, De Stefani E, Ronco A (1996) Vegetables, fruits, and risk of colorectal 
cancer: a case–control study from Uruguay. Nutr Cancer 25(3):297–304  
     105.    Kaefer CM, Milner JA (2011) Herbs and spices in cancer prevention and treatment. In: 
Benzie IFF, Wachtel-Galor S (eds) Herbal medicine: biomolecular and clinical aspects, 2nd edn. CRC Press, Boca Raton  
    106.    Lampe JW (2003) Spicing up a vegetarian diet: chemopreventive effects of phytochemicals. 
Am J Clin Nutr 78(3 Suppl):579S–583S  
    107.    Tapsell LC, Hemphill I, Cobiac L, Patch CS, Sullivan DR, Fenech M, Roodenrys S, Keogh 
JB, Clifton PM, Williams PG, Fazio V A, Inge KE (2006) Health beneﬁ  ts of herbs and spices: 
the past, the present, the future. Med J Aust 185(4 Suppl):S4–S24  
      108.    Dwivedi V , Shrivastava R, Hussain S, Ganguly C, Bharadwaj M (2011) Comparative antican-
cer potential of clove ( Syzygium aromaticum  ) – an Indian spice – against cancer cell lines of 
various anatomical origin. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 12:1989–1993  
    109.    Aggarwal BB, Kunnumakkara AB, Harikumar KB, Tharakan ST, Sung B, Anand P (2008) 
Potential of spice-derived phytochemicals for cancer prevention. Planta Med 74(13):1560–1569  
    110.    Aggarwal BB, Sundaram C, Malani N, Ichikawa H (2007) Curcumin: the Indian solid gold. 
Adv Exp Med Biol 595:1–75  
    111.    Baumeister P, Reiter M, Harréus U (2012) Curcumin and other polyphenolic compounds in 
head and neck cancer chemoprevention. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2012:902716  
    112.    Goel A, Kunnumakkara AB, Aggarwal BB (2008) Curcumin as “Curecumin”: from kitchen 
to clinic. Biochem Pharmacol 75(4):787–809  
    113.    Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S (2006) Molecular targets of dietary agents for prevention and 
therapy of cancer. Biochem Pharmacol 71(10):1397–1421  
    114.    Teiten M, Eifes S, Dicato M, Diederich M (2010) Curcumin – the paradigm of a multi-target 
natural compound with applications in cancer prevention and treatment. Toxins 2:128–162  
    115.    Steward WP, Gescher AJ (2008) Curcumin in cancer management: recent results of analogue 
design and clinical studies and desirable future research. Mol Nutr Food Res 52:1005–1009  
     116.    Baliga MS, Haniadka R, Pereira MM, D’Souza JJ, Pallaty PL, Bhat HP, Popuri S (2011) 
Update on the chemopreventive effects of ginger and its phytochemicals. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 51(6):499–523  
    117.    Karna P, Chagani S, Gundala SR, Rida PC, Asif G, Sharma V , Gupta MV , Aneja R (2012) 
Beneﬁ  ts of whole ginger extract in prostate cancer. Br J Nutr 107(4):473–484  
     118.    Brahmbhatt M, Gundala SR, Asif G, Shamsi SA, Aneja R (2013) Ginger phytochemicals 
exhibit synergy to inhibit prostate cancer cell proliferation. Nutr Cancer 65(2):263–272  
   119.    Krell J, Stebbing J (2012) Ginger: the root of cancer therapy? Lancet Oncol 13(3):235–236      120.    Liu Y , Whelan RJ, Pattnaik BR, Ludwig K, Subudhi E, Rowland H, Claussen N, Zucker N, 
Uppal S, Kushner DM, Felder M, Patankar MS, Kapur A (2012) Terpenoids from  Zingiber 
ofﬁ  cinale  (Ginger) induce apoptosis in endometrial cancer cells through the activation of p53. 
PLoS One 7(12):e53178  
    121.    Iciek M, Kwiecie ń I, Włodek L (2009) Biological properties of garlic and garlic-derived 
organosulfur compounds. Environ Mol Mutagen 50(3):247–265  
    122.    Siegers CP, Steffen B, Robke A, Pentz R (1999) The effects of garlic preparations against 
human tumour cell proliferation. Phytomedicine 6:7–11  
    123.    Fanelli SL, Castro GD, De-toranzo EG, Castro JA (1998) Mechanisms of the preventive 
properties of some garlic components in carbon tetrachloride-promoted oxidative stress, dial-lyl sulphide, diallyl disulphide, allyl mercaptan and allyl methyl sulphide. Res Commun Mol Path 102:163–174  8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
104
    124.   National Cancer Institute (2008) Garlic and cancer prevention.   http://www.cancer.gov/ 
cancertopics/factsheet/prevention/garlic-and-cancer-prevention    . Accessed 14 July 2013  
    125.    Fleischauer AT, Arab L (2001) Garlic and cancer: a critical review of the epidemiologic 
 literature. J Nutr 131(3s):1032S–1040S  
    126.    Li H, Li HQ, Wang Y et al (2004) An intervention study to prevent gastric cancer by 
 micro- selenium and large dose of allitridum. Chinese Med J 117(8):1155–1160  
    127.    Banerjee S, Panda CK, Das S (2006) Clove ( Ayzygium aromaticum   L.), a potential chemopre-
ventive agent for lung cancer. Carcinogenesis 27:1645–1654  
    128.    Mohamad RH, El-Bastawesy AM, Abdel-Monem MG, Noor AM, Al-Mehdar HA, Sharawy 
SM, El-Merzabani MM (2011) Antioxidant and anticarcinogenic effects of methanolic 
extract and volatile oil of fennel seeds ( Foeniculum vulgare  ). J Med Food 14(9):986–1001  
    129.    Singh B, Kale RK (2008) Chemomodulatory action of  Foeniculum vulgare   (fennel) on skin 
and forestomach papillomagenesis, enzymes associated with xenobiotic metabolism and 
antioxidant status in murine model system. Food Chem Toxicol 46(12):3842–3850  
    130.    Khan MA, Chen HC, Tania M, Zhang DZ (2011) Anticancer activities of  Nigella sativa   
(black cumin). Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med 8(5 Suppl):226–232  
    131.    Hasan TN, Shaﬁ   G, Syed NA, Alfawaz MA, Alsaif MA, Munshi A, Lei KY , Alshatwi AA 
(2013) Methanolic extract of  Nigella sativa   seed inhibits SiHa human cervical cancer cell 
proliferation through apoptosis. Nat Prod Commun 8(2):213–216  
    132.    Bhattacharjee B, Vijayasarathy S, Karunakar P, Chatterjee J (2012) Comparative reverse 
screening approach to identify potential anti-neoplastic targets of saffron functional compo-
nents and binding mode. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 13(11):5605–5611  
    133.    Hong JW, Yang GE, Kim YB, Eom SH, Lew JH, Kang H (2012) Anti-inﬂ  ammatory activity 
of cinnamon water extract in vivo  and in vitro  LPS-induced models. BMC Complement 
Altern Med 12:237. doi:  10.1186/1472-6882-12-237      
    134.    Kwon HK, Hwang JS, So JS, Lee CG, Sahoo A, Ryu JH, Jeon WK, Ko BS, Im CR, Lee SH, 
Park ZY , Im SH (2010) Cinnamon extract induces tumor cell death through inhibition of 
NFκB and AP1. BMC Cancer 10:392. doi:  10.1186/1471-2407-10-392      
    135.    Banerjee S, Sharma R, Kale RK, Rao AR (1994) Inﬂ  uence of certain essential oils on car-
cinogen- metabolizing enzymes and acid-soluble sulfhydryls in mouse liver. Nutr Cancer 
21:263–269  
    136.    Pal SK, Shukla Y (2003) Herbal medicine: current status and the future. Asian Pac J Cancer 
Prev 4:281–288  
    137.    Gullett NP, Ruhul Amin AR, Bayraktar S, Pezzuto JM, Shin DM, Khuri FR, Aggarwal BB, 
Surh YJ, Kucuk O (2010) Cancer prevention with natural compounds. Semin Oncol 
37(3):258–281  
    138.    Cravotto G, Boffa L, Genzini L, Garella D (2010) Phytotherapeutics: an evaluation of the 
potential of 1000 plants. J Clin Pharm Ther 35:11–48  
    139.    Patel B, Das S, Prakash R, Yasir M (2010) Natural bioactive compound with anticancer 
potential. Int J Advan Pharm Sci 1:32–41  
     140.    Smit HF, Woerdenbag HJ, Singh RH, Meulenbeld GJ, Labadie RP, Zwaving JH (1995) 
Ayurvedic herbal drugs with possible cytostatic activity. J Ethnopharmacol 47:75–84  
    141.    Bailey HH, Mukhtar H (2013) Green tea polyphenols and cancer chemoprevention 
of genitourinary cancer. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 2013:92–96. doi:  10.1200/
EdBook_AM.2013.33.92      
    142.    Darvesh AS, Bishayee A (2013) Chemopreventive and therapeutic potential of tea polyphe-
nols in hepatocellular cancer. Nutr Cancer 65(3):329–344  
    143.    Graham HN (1992) Green tea composition consumption and polyphenols chemistry. Prev 
Med 21:334–350  
    144.    Du GJ, Zhang Z, Wen XD, Yu C, Calway T, Yuan CS, Wang CZ (2012) Epigallocatechin 
Gallate (EGCG) is the most effective cancer chemopreventive polyphenol in green tea. 
Nutrients 4(11):1679–1691  
     145.   Donejko M, Niczyporuk M, Galicka E, Przylipiak A (2013) Anti-cancer properties 
epigallocatechin- gallate contained in green tea. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online) 67:26–34  S.K. Pal
105
   146.    Lee AH, Su D, Pasalich M, Binns CW (2013) Tea consumption reduces ovarian cancer risk. 
Cancer Epidemiol 37(1):54–59  
   147.    Wang ZH, Gao QY , Fang JY (2012) Green tea and incidence of colorectal cancer: evidence 
from prospective cohort studies. Nutr Cancer 64(8):1143–1152  
    148.    Zheng P, Zheng HM, Deng XM, Zhang YD (2012) Green tea consumption and risk of esoph-
ageal cancer: a meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies. BMC Gastroenterol 12:165. 
doi:  10.1186/1471-230X-12-165      
    149.   Nangia-Makker P, Raz T, Tait L, Shekhar MP, Li H, Balan V , Makker H, Fridman R, 
Maddipati K, Raz A (2013)  Ocimum gratissimum  retards breast cancer growth and progres-
sion and is a natural inhibitor of matrix metalloproteases. Cancer Biol Ther 14(5).   http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23380593      
    150.    Shimizu T, Torres MP, Chakraborty S, Souchek JJ, Rachagani S, Kaur S, Macha M, Ganti 
AK, Hauke RJ, Batra SK (2013) Holy Basil leaf extract decreases tumorigenicity and metas-
tasis of aggressive human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro  and in vivo : potential role in therapy. 
Cancer Lett 336(2):270–280  
    151.    Nagaprashantha LD, Vatsyayan R, Singhal J, Fast S, Roby R, Awasthi S, Singhal SS (2011) 
Anti-cancer effects of novel ﬂ  avonoid vicenin-2 as a single agent and in synergistic combina-
tion with docetaxel in prostate cancer. Biochem Pharmacol 82(9):1100–1109  
     152.    Srivastava P, Yadav N, Lella R, Schneider A, Jones A, Marlowe T, Lovett G, O’Loughlin K, 
Minderman H, Gogada R, Chandra D (2012) Neem oil limonoids induces p53-independent 
apoptosis and autophagy. Carcinogenesis 33(11):2199–2207  
    153.    Paul R, Prasad M, Sah NK (2011) Anticancer biology of  Azadirachta indica   L (neem): a mini 
review. Cancer Biol Ther 12(6):467–476  
    154.    Kikuchi T, Ishii K, Noto T, Takahashi A, Tabata K, Suzuki T, Akihisa T (2011) Cytotoxic and 
apoptosis-inducing activities of limonoids from the seeds of  Azadirachta indica   (neem). J Nat 
Prod 74(4):866–870  
    155.    Bose A, Baral R (2007) Natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity of tumor cells initiated by 
neem leaf preparation is associated with CD40-CD40L-mediated endogenous production of 
interleukin-12. Hum Immunol 68(10):823–831  
    156.    Elumalai P, Gunadharini DN, Senthilkumar K, Banudevi S, Arunkumar R, Benson CS, 
Sharmila G, Arunakaran J (2012) Induction of apoptosis in human breast cancer cells by 
nimbolide through extrinsic and intrinsic pathway. Toxicol Lett 215(2):131–142  
   157.    Schumacher M, Cerella C, Reuter S, Dicato M, Diederich M (2011) Anti-inﬂ  ammatory, pro- 
apoptotic, and anti-proliferative effects of a methanolic neem ( Azadirachta indica  ) leaf extract 
are mediated via modulation of the nuclear factor- κB pathway. Genes Nutr 6(2):149–160  
    158.    Vasenwala SM, Seth R, Haider N, Islam N, Khan T, Maheshwari V , Ur Rehman SA (2012) 
Study on antioxidant and apoptotic effect of  Azadirachta Indica   (neem) in cases of cervical 
cancer. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(5):1255–1259  
    159.    Govindarajan R, Vijayakumar M, Pushpangadan P (2005) Antioxidant approach to disease 
management and the role of ‘Rasayana’ herbs of ayurveda. J Ethnopharmacol 99(2):165–178  
    160.    Craig WJ (1997) Phytochemicals: guardians of our health. J Am Diet Assoc 97(10 Suppl 2): 
S199–S204  
    161.    Xu T, Beelman RB, Lambert JD (2012) The cancer preventive effects of edible mushrooms. 
Anticancer Agents Med Chem 12(10):1255–1263  
    162.   Scott EN, Gescher AJ, Steward WP, Brown K (2009) Development of dietary phytochemical 
chemopreventive agents: biomarkers and choice of dose for early clinical trials. Cancer Prev 
Res 2:525–50    8 Food-Based Interventions for Cancer Management: An Ayurvedic Perspective
107 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_9, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 20149.1            Introduction 
 Hippocrates stated around 2,000 years ago, “Let food be your medicine and  medicine 
be your food.” Herbs and spices have a long history of both culinary and medicinal 
uses. They are an integral part of the daily diet. Herbs and spices can add variety, 
ﬂ avor, color, and aroma to everyday food while contributing a wide range of both 
nutrients and bioactives that may contribute to improved health. They can act syner-
gistically to enhance the health-promoting properties of other food. Many of the 
pharmacological properties of traditional herbs have been well documented [ 1 ,  2 ]. 
 Since prehistoric times, herbs have been the basis of nearly all medicinal therapy 
until synthetic drugs were developed in the nineteenth century. Today, herbs are 
grown and used for their ability to enhance and complement the ﬂ  avors of a wide 
variety of foods. The majority of herbs and spices constitute important bioactive 
secondary metabolites that possess versatile pharmacological and medicinal proper-
ties. The health-promoting effects of vegetables and fruits is thought to relate not 
only to their general nutritional proﬁ  le – high in dietary ﬁ  bers, low in fat and salts, 
low energy density, and high in vitamins A, C, and foliate – but also to a wide range 
of nonnutrient bioactives and phytochemicals such as ﬂ  avonoids and phenols. It has 
been proposed that the additive and synergistic effects of the complex mixture of 
phytochemicals in fruits and vegetables, herbs, and spices are largely responsible 
for their health beneﬁ  ts. Wild vegetables have been reported to contain compara-
tively high amounts of vitamins A and C and other antioxidant micronutrients and 
promote good health by assisting in the prevention of cancer and high blood pres-
sure, stimulating the immune system, and improving drug metabolism and tissue 
regeneration. Food-based therapeutics utilize traditional knowledge based on     Chapter 9   
 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging 
Paradigm of Traditional and Modern 
Food Science 
             Rishi     Pal     and      K.    K.     Pant    
        R.   Pal         K.  K.   Pant      ( *) 
  Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics ,  King George’s Medical University , 
  Lucknow ,  UP   226003 ,  India   
 e-mail: pant.kamlesh@gmail.com  
108
Chinese and indigenous herbal food recipes from ancient times [ 3 – 5 ]. Some of the 
common plants used since ancient times in food preparation and also traditionally 
used in “grandma’s recipes” are given in Table  9.1 .
   It has been observed that food herbs works better when administered as a whole 
compared to the isolated compounds. In Ayurveda it is mentioned that polyherbal    Table 9.1    Common food plants and their medicinal properties   
 Plants  Scientiﬁ  c name  Medicinal properties/indication 
 Ajowain   Trachyspermum 
roxburghianum    Expectorant, antiﬂ  atulent 
 Asafoetida   Aerula asfoetida    Antihelminthic, antitussive 
 Capsicum pepper   Capsicum frutescens    Analgesic, counterirritant 
 Cinnamon cassia   Cinnamomum zeylanicum    Antiseptic, antidiarrheal 
 Clove   Syzygium aromaticum    Topical anesthetic, antidyspeptic 
 Coriander   Grewia tilaefolia    Antispasmodic, diuretic, anti-inﬂ  ammatory 
 Cumin   Cuminum cyminum    Antimicrobial, vermifuge, diuretic 
 Black pepper   Piper nigrum    Carminative, anti-inﬂ  ammatory 
 Curry leaves   Murraya koenigii    Antiemetic 
 Ginger   Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale    Cold, antiemetic, antirheumatic 
 Nutmeg   Myristica fragans    Astringent, hallucinogenic 
 Peppercorns     Piper nigrum   Expectorant, antimicrobial 
 Saffron   Crocus sativa    Antirheumatic, for neuralgia 
 Turmeric   Curcuma longa    Antiarthritic, antioxidant, anticancer 
 Garlic   Allium ativum    Antimicrobial, antihypercholesterolemic, 
anticancer, antihypertensive 
 Mustard   Brassica compestris    Eczema, intestinal catarrh, colic pain, ﬂ  atulence 
 Onion   Allium cepa    For cold, expectorant, anticancer, antiasthma 
 Aniseed   Brassica oleracea    Counterirritant, emetic, purgative 
antispasmodic, expectorant 
 Cardamom   Elettaria cardamomum    Antiseptic 
 Fennel   Foeniculum valgae    Antispasmodic, diuretic 
 Lemon grass   Cymbopogon citrates    Fever, insect bites 
 Sesame seed   Sesamum indicum    Diuretic, galactogogue, demulcent 
 Dalchini   Cinnamomun zelanicum    Menstrual pain, indigestion 
 Mint   Menthe arvensis    Expectorant, for cold, local anesthesia, 
antispasmodic 
 Oregano   Origanum vulgare    Antitussive, antirheumatic, vermifuge 
 Poppy seed   Papaver somniferum    Sedative, antispasmodic 
 Coffee   Coffea robusta    Stimulant, diuretic, bronchodilator 
 Tea   Thea sinensis    Antioxidant, source of theophylline 
 Tamarind   Tamarindus indica    Antiseptic, cholagogue, laxative, antipyretic 
 Tejpatra   Cinnamomum tamala    Migrane, peptic ulcer 
 Bail   Aegel marmelos    Constipation, diarrhea, peptic ulcer, diabetes 
 Mulethi   Glycyrrhiza glabra    Muscular pain, mouth ulcers, sore throat 
 Soyabean   Glycine max    Malnutrition, allergies, diabetes, dandruff 
 Tulsi   Ocimum sanctum    Anti-inﬂ  ammatory, expectorant, analgesic, 
antitumor, antibacterial 
 Banana   Musa paradisiaca    Mild laxative, diarrhea/dysentery R. Pal and K.K. Pant
109
formulations have better therapeutic potential compared to single herbs or their 
 isolated active compounds due to the synergistic pharmacological effects of each 
herb. These food-based herbs have signiﬁ  cant potential in preventing rather than 
curing diseases [ 6 ].  
9.2     Food as Antioxidants 
 One of the beneﬁ  ts of culinary herbs and spices is due primarily to their antioxidant 
properties. Free radicals and related species are generated in the body as a result of 
metabolic reactions. The accumulation of free radicals causes damage in living sys-
tems, resulting in oxidative stress. Free radical scavengers (antioxidants) have the 
potential to prevent, delay, or ameliorate many human chronic and aging diseases 
such as cancer, diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and rheumatoid arthritis. Free radical 
scavenging is an important mechanism for the inhibition of lipid peroxidation and 
can be a good marker for antioxidant activity. Results of studies indicate that the 
addition of some spices and herbs to food products can prevent the oxidative dete-
rioration of foods. The multiple roles of traditional vegetables as food and medici-
nal sources have been widely documented [ 7 ]. 
 The newly developed branches of food science are brieﬂ  y discussed in what 
follows. 
9.2.1     Nutraceuticals 
 Any substance that is a food or part of a food and provides medical or health  beneﬁ  ts, 
including the prevention and treatment of diseases, is called a nutraceutical. Such 
products may range from isolated nutrients, dietary supplements, and speciﬁ  c diets 
to genetically engineered designer foods and herbal products [ 7 ]. 
 There is a slight difference between functional foods and nutraceuticals. When 
food is being cooked or prepared using “scientiﬁ  c intelligence” with or without 
knowledge of how or why it is being used, the food is called a functional food. Thus, 
functional food provides the body with its daily requirements of vitamins, fats, pro-
teins, carbohydrates, and other nutrients needed for healthy survival. When func-
tional food aids in the prevention or treatment of diseases or disorders other than 
anemia, it is called a nutraceutical. Examples of nutraceuticals include fortiﬁ  ed 
dairy products (e.g., milk) and citrus fruits (e.g., orange juice).  
9.2.2     Probiotics 
 Probiotics are live microorganisms (in most cases bacteria) that are similar to ben-
eﬁ cial microorganisms found in the human gut. They are also called friendly 9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
110
bacteria or good bacteria. Probiotics are available for consumers mainly in the form 
of dietary supplements and foods. They are also used as complementary and alter-
native medicine (CAM). Most often, the bacteria come from two groups,  lactobacil-
lus  or  biﬁ  dobacterium  . Probiotics can be used to alleviate lactose intolerance, treat 
diarrhea, and enhance immune functions. In reference to using probiotics to treat 
diarrhea, but the evidence supporting the prevention of travelers’s diarrhea by pro-
biotics is weak. There exists an overall protective effect in the prevention and treat-
ment of antibiotic-associated diarrhea, with strong evidence for the efﬁ  ciency of 
 lactobacillus   in treating diarrhea-induced by rotavirus infection. As probiotics play a 
role in immunomodulation, naw a days, has received most attention.    Several in vitro 
and in vivo studies on probiotics have reported an immune-boosting role. The speciﬁ  c 
mechanisms of the probiotics-induced observed changes remain unclear. Generally, 
enhanced sIgA production and splenocyte proliferation were observed during probiot-
ics treatment. Moreover, regarding cytokine production, several studies have shown 
that cytokine production by the cells of the immune system can be altered by probiotic 
use, which may lead to immunomodulation. Hence, probiotics may play a signiﬁ  cant 
role in defense against various infectious microorganisms [ 8 ,  9 ].   
9.3     Food-Based Therapeutics 
 The basic qualities of food products, such as, for example, aroma, ﬂ  avor, pungency, 
and color, must be conserved for value-added products and this must start at the 
farm level. The ﬁ  rst spice, oil, and oleoresin industry was launched in 1930 in India 
at Calicut. An extract of ginger was manufactured for therapeutics during World 
War II. The major oils extracted for therapeutic purposes were from black pepper, 
chili seed, capsicum, clove, nutmeg, mace, cassia, juniper, and peppermint. Pepper, 
ginger, and peppermint oils are the major oils exported from India. The food spices 
exported from India are black pepper, chilies, capsicum, ginger, turmeric, white 
pepper, coriander, cumin, fennel, mustard seed, garlic, clove, nutmeg, and curry 
powder, which are food ingredients and have therapeutic potentials. The role of 
these food plant products has been known since ancient times for the prevention of 
many diseases and for the treatment of diseases [ 10 – 14 ]. Green tea extract ( Camellia 
sinensis  ) was given qualiﬁ  ed approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
   for cancer prevention due to the presence of (−)-epigallocatechin gallate. 
 Some of the common herbs used as food ingredients since antiquity, with their 
scientiﬁ  c validity as pharmaceuticals, are described in what follows. 
9.3.1     Garlic ( Allium sativum  ) 
 Garlic has been the most important food ingredient since ancient times, and its 
uses are widely described in Ayurveda. The scientiﬁ  c therapeutic effects of R. Pal and K.K. Pant
111
garlic as a hypolipidemic, antithrombotic, antihypertensive, antihyperglycemic, 
 antihypercholesterolemia, and immunomodulatory substance have been reported 
[ 15 ,  16 ]. The bioactive components responsible for the health beneﬁ  ts of garlic are 
assumed to be allylic sulfur compounds. The use of herbs to displace fats and salts 
in the diet may reduce cardiovascular risk. The most convincing studies on the spe-
ciﬁ c herbs or spices shows beneﬁ  cial effects in cardiovascular diseases similar to 
garlic which is commonly used    to reduce cholesterol and cardiovascular risk [ 15 ]. 
 The consumption of garlic or garlic oil has been associated with a reduction in 
total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and triglyceride levels. 
An intake of the one half and one garlic per day    may reduce total cholesterol by 
9 %. Garlic extracts have been shown to have anticlotting properties and to cause a 
modest reduction in blood pressure, an approximately 5.5 % decrease in systolic 
blood pressure. Its effectiveness is associated with the active substances in garlic 
such as allicin and other breakdown products. Allicin has also been isolated and 
identiﬁ  ed as the component responsible for remarkable antibacterial activities. 
It  has been observed that these therapeutic effects are more pronounced compared 
to the isolated components alone [ 17 ]. 
 The therapeutic application of allicin as an antifungal, antiparasitic, and anti 
viral agent having other antibiotic effects as well has been shown. Inhibition of 
certain thiol-containing enzymes    in microorganisms by the allicin assumed to be the 
main mechanism involved in its antibiotic effect. Allicin and ajoene, the major sul-
fur containing compounds of garlic   , were shown to inhibit inducible nitric oxide 
synthetase (iNOS), by reducing the protein and mRNA, and thus to promote vaso-
dilatation.    Rodent cancer model    have shown that diallyl sulﬁ  te, a compound of gar-
lic, is effective in the detoxiﬁ  cation of carcinogens through its effect on Phase I and 
Phase II enzymes [ 18 – 20 ]. Modern medicine has also adopted garlic as a medicine, 
especially for cardiovascular diseases, and pharmaceutical preparations of it are 
now available.  
9.3.2     Ginger ( Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale  ) 
 Ginger is used in food recipes and in herbal tea preparation worldwide and is widely 
used to treat the common cold. It has many therapeutic attributes such as antimicro-
bial, antithrombotic, antiinﬂ  ammatory, and anticancer activities [ 21 ,  22 ]. It has also 
been demonstrated to possess antimutagenic properties, induce detoxiﬁ  cation, pre-
vent DNA damage in vitro, and reduce nausea and vomiting in pregnancy [ 23 ]. 
Ginger has a mixture of several of 100 known constituents, including gingerols, 
shagaols, β-carotene, caffeic acid, curcumine, salisylates, and capsaicin. 
 The aroma of ginger is due to the constituents of its steam-volatile oils, which are 
mainly sesquiterpene hydrocarbon, monoterpine hydrocarbon, and oxygenated 
hydrocarbons, while its pungency is due to the nonsteam volatile components also 
known as gingerols. The major sesquiterpene hydrocarbon constituent of ginger oils 
is a-zingiberene. Certain ginger oils have a reputation for possessing a particular 9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
112
lemony aroma due to their high contents of the isomers neral and geranial, often 
collectively referred to as citral. 
 Ginger is a major tranquillizer and carminative agent due to its gingerols. It is 
used as a spice and as an important medicinal product. It has been recommended for 
use in treating peptic ulceration due to its action as a thromboxane synthatase inhib-
itor. Several controlled clinical trials suggest that ginger root can relieve symptoms 
of motion sickness by a mechanism of action that differs from that of antihista-
mines. The responsible constituents are believed to be gingerols and shagaols. 
Ginger root is a putative agent for preventing aging-dependent vascular changes and 
impotence. A recent reverse pharmacological study on ginger aqueous extracts of 
whole rhizome showed an antihypertensive activity of the extracts in experimental 
animals [ 22 – 24 ]. Clinical studies must be designed to scientiﬁ  cally validate the 
potential of this plant.  
9.3.3     Nutmeg ( Myristica fragans  ) 
 Nutmeg is a spice that has been used in culinary arts and food preparation since 
ancient times. It is claimed that nutmeg can be used to treat ailments of the digestive 
tract such as stomach cramps and diarrhea as well as catarrh of the respiratory tract. 
Extracts of nutmeg were found to stimulate mounting behavior in mice and to 
signiﬁ  cantly increase their mating performance, with no conspicuous general 
short- term toxicity. Nutmeg oil possesses strong antibacterial, antifungal, anti-
inﬂ ammatory, and insecticidal properties due to the presence of sarbinen, β- and 
α-pinenes, eugenols, isoeugenols, methyl engenol, safrol, neolignan, myristicin, 
ellemicin, and linalool. Myristicin isolated from the nut has hallucinogenic proper-
ties, and lignin types of the constituents are anticarcinogenic [ 25 ]. There is a need 
to scientiﬁ  cally validate the therapeutic potential of nutmeg using a reverse pharma-
cology approach.  
9.3.4     Onion ( Allium cepa  ) 
 Onions are commonly used worldwide as food component and whole green plant    & 
their dried bulbs are used in food preparations. Onion juice has been claimed to treat 
appetite loss, the prevention of age-related changes in blood vessels (arteriosclero-
sis), minor digestive disturbances, and other ailments such as cold, cough, asthma, 
and diabetes. Onions undergo enzymatic breakdown of sulfur-containing substances 
due to damage to tissues, and this gives off pungent volatile compounds that cause 
weeping. The pharmacological activity and the pungent smell are due to sulfur-
containing compounds, mainly sulfoxides and cepanenes. The therapeutic proper-
ties of onion require more clinical emphasis to scientiﬁ  cally validate the potential of 
this plant.  R. Pal and K.K. Pant
113
9.3.5     Black Pepper ( Piper nigrum  ) 
 Black pepper is the core spice in the preparation of curry, which has been used 
since ancient times. It contains β- and α-pinenes, δ-limonene, and β-caryophyllene 
as major components. Major compounds in fresh pepper include trans-linanalool 
oxide and α-terpineol. Pepper has long been recognized as a carminative due to its 
beneﬁ  cial effects of stimulating gastric acid secretion by piperine   . It has impres-
sive antioxidant and anti-inﬂ  ammatory effects. Chili causes dyspepsia in patients 
with or without ulcers, and patients with ulcers are often advised to avoid its use. 
The protective effect of capsicum could involve vanilloid receptors because resin-
iferatoxin, an ultrapotent analog of capsaicin, also displays antiulcer activity. 
Piperine has synergistic effects and increases bioavailability of some modern drugs    
[ 26 ]. Recent reverse pharmacological studies also suggest that piperine has good 
antioxidant potential and shows protective effects against heavy metal toxicity. A 
reverse pharmacological approach is needed to scientiﬁ  cally validate the therapeu-
tic use of black pepper. Some pharmaceutical preparations of piperine are available 
in combination with some antibiotics to increase its bioavailability and reduce 
toxicity.  
9.3.6     Chili ( Capcicum frutescens  ) 
 Chili pepper is a hot spice and an essential component of culinary preparation. 
Scientiﬁ  cally, it may interact with epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract to 
modulate their transport properties. It contains piperine and capsaicin as the main 
components. Several pharmacological effects of capsaicin    transiently reduced 
resistance and piperine increased resistance, making them similarly effective as 
seen with crude spice extract. Both red and black pepper may induce epigastric 
pain by removing the stomach’s hydrophobic lining and activating intramucosal 
pain receptors. Chili, being rich in phenolic compounds, would be expected to 
bind iron in the intestine and inhibit its absorption. Capsaicin in commercially 
available therapeutic skin creams is effective in the treatment of various kinds of 
pain [ 27 ,  28 ].  
9.3.7     Red Pepper ( Capsicum annuum  ) 
 Red pepper contains capsain and capsaicin and is used as a spice and as medicine. 
Capsaicin, the pungent active principal component of red chili, has been shown to 
cause gastric mucosal edema and hyperemia and decrease gastric acid output. 
Capsaicin helps in the metabolism of epoxide aromatic hydrocarbons, which inter-
feres with their ability to bind to DNA (causing mutations). Capsaicin interacts with 9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
114
the cough receptor and sensitizes it and produces coughing [ 28 ,  29 ]. The reverse 
pharmacological approach is further needed to validate Ayurvedic claims and to 
understand this spice’s molecular mechanisms of action.  
9.3.8     Tamarind ( Tamarindus indica  ) 
 The fruit of tamarind has a sour taste and is commonly used in food preparations to 
increase taste. It has numerous traditional therapeutic uses, including in the treat-
ment of liver and bile disorders. The fruit pulp is used as a drink and is rich in pec-
tin, monosaccharides, and organic acids. Further research is needed to scientiﬁ  cally 
validate the use of tamarind as a therapeutic preparation.  
9.3.9     Turmeric ( Curcuma longa  ) 
 Turmeric is a yellow powder obtained from the dried rhizome of the  Curcuma longa   
plant .  Apart from its culinary appeal and common use as a spice, it has been well 
known in India for its medicinal properties for more than 6,000 years. The powder 
form is used in various dishes. It is a widely and extensively studied spice of Indian 
origin. It is used in the treatment of peptic ulcer and for its carminative effects. 
Curcumin [1,7-bis (4-hudroxy-3-methoxy phenyl)-1-6-heptadine-3-5-dione], 
demethoxycurcumin, and bis-dimethoxycurcumin are the main yellow compounds 
isolated from turmeric   . Its immunomodulatory, antioxidant, anti-inﬂ  ammatory, and 
antitumor properties are well documented. The molecular structure of turmeric is 
widely understood. The pharmacological actions of turmeric are wast, and some of 
them are discussed in what follows. 
 Curcumin reduces nitric oxide (NO) and exerts beneﬁ  cial effects in experimental 
colitis, which is why inﬂ  ammatory bowel disease (IBD) due to oxidative and nitro-
sative    stresses is treated using this yellow pigment. The three types of curcuminoids, 
I, II, and III, differ with regard to their hydroxyl and methyl groups. Whole turmeric 
or extracted curcuminoids appear to be active in many disease processes, with spe-
ciﬁ c reference to chronic ailments such as cardiovascular, degenerative, infective, 
and inﬂ  ammatory disorders as well as cancers [ 30 ]. 
 The chemopreventive and bioprotectant properties of curcumin in turmeric 
increases cancer cells’ sensitivity to certain drugs commonly used to combat cancer, 
rendering chemotherapy more effective. Curcumin also possesses strong antimicro-
bial activity and inhibits the HIV-1 integrase enzyme. Curcumin and capsaicin alter 
bile salt secretion to make it less lithogenic and lower cholesterol levels, with no 
signiﬁ  cant effect on fat absorption. Capsaicin with curcumin acts as a lipotrope, 
preventing triglyceride accumulation and increasing preferential utilization of fats 
[ 31 ]. It also stimulates lipid mobilization and lowers adipose tissue weight and 
serum triglycerides in fat-fed rats. The therapeutic uses of curcumin are limited R. Pal and K.K. Pant
115
because of its unstable nature in isolated form   . According to researchers studying 
turmeric, the bioavailablity of curcumin is very low. When curcumin is combined 
with piperine, its unstable nature and bioavailability increased. It is a wonder spice 
   and has strong therapeutic potential in preventing many diseases including cancer 
[ 32 ]. But no single drug comes out from this golden spice for medical practice till 
date. There is a need for further research using pharmaceutical techniques to increase 
curcumin’s stability and to enhance its bioavailability. Drug targeted delivery sys-
tems like nanotechnology are needed to take advantage of the therapeutic potential 
of curcumin to treat and prevent noncurable diseases like cancer [ 30 ,  33 ]. Reverse 
pharmacological approaches and use of molecular biology techniques are needed to 
understand its molecular mechanisms of action at signal transduction level.  
9.3.10     Star Anise ( Illicium verum  ) 
 In star anise, the presence of prenyl moiety in the phenylpropanoid plays an 
important role in antitumor-promoting activity. Hence, prenylated phenylpro-
panoids might be valuable as a potential cancer chemoprotective agent. Star anise 
is the industrial source of shikimic acid, a primary ingredient used to create the 
antiﬂ u drug Tamiﬂ  u, which is regarded as the most promising drug to mitigate the 
severity of the bird ﬂ  u H 5 N 1  strain of virus   . Tamiﬂ  u is the only therapeutic drug 
available for clinical use in modern medicine that may reduce the severity of bird 
ﬂ u [ 34 ].  
9.3.11     Tulsi ( Ocimum sanctum  ) 
 Preliminary studies on Tulsi have shown that its leaves and seeds may help people 
with type 2 diabetes to control their blood sugar level. Its protective effects in 
stress and anxiety disorders have also been proven. Its leaves are used in medicated 
diets and in herbal teas, which have some potential protective effects against sore 
throat and respiratory infections. It is commercially available in powder form for 
therapeutic purposes [ 35 ].  
9.3.12     Curry Leaf ( Murraya koenigii  ) 
 The curry leaf plant is highly valued for its characteristic aroma and medicinal 
value. A number of leaf essential oil constituents and carbazole, murrayacine, and 
koenigine alkaloids have been extracted from the plant. There are a large number of 
oxygenated mono- and sesquiterpenes present, for example, cis-ocimene (34.1 %), 
β-caryophyllene    (9.5 %), α-pinene (19.1 %), δ-terpine (6.7 %), and β-phellandrene, 9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
116
which appear to be responsible for intense odor associated with stalk and ﬂ  owery 
parts of curry leaves. Both  Murraya koenigii   and  Brassica juncea   showed signiﬁ  -
cant hypoglycemic action in experimental rats [ 36 ].  
9.3.13     Bitter Gourd ( Momordica charantia  ) 
 Commonly known as bitter melon, bitter lemon, and karela in Hindi, the gourd is an 
economically important medicinal food plant. The immature fruit is eaten as a veg-
etable and is a good source of vitamins C and A, phosphorus, and iron. The vitamin 
content of Chinese bitter gourd varies from 440 to 780 mg/kg per edible portion. 
The secondary metabolites are cucurbitane-type triterpenoids. These compounds 
and their glycones showed some biological effects that are beneﬁ  cial in the treat-
ment of diabetes and obesity. A scientiﬁ  c review on the antidiabetic and hypoglyce-
mic effects of  M. charantia   in animal and clinical studies showed some promising 
protective abilities. The fruits and seeds of the bitter gourd possess medicinal prop-
erties such as anti-HIV , anticancer, anti-inﬂ  ammatory, antileukemic, antimicrobial, 
antitumor, and antidiabetic properties [ 37 ]. Freeze-dried bitter melon capsules are 
widely available and marketed in health food stores worldwide. The low-calorie 
bitter gourd buccal tablet commonly has an auxiliary therapeutic use in the treat-
ment of diabetes.  
9.3.14     Lotus ( Nelumbo nicifera  ) 
 The juice of the lotus is extracted from edible fruits and mixed with some edible medici-
nal herbs for health beneﬁ  ts   . Fresh lotus ( Nelumbo nicifera  ) leaves are a good example    
of hypolipidimic & hypoglycemic agent documented in the  Compendium of Metrica 
Medica and Pharmacopoeia      of the People’s Republic of China (2005). Studies on the 
lotus leaf methanolic extract shows its hypoglycemic effects and may be useful    in the 
control of hyperglycemia in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus through their phar-
macological action as insulin secretagogues in vitro and in vivo [ 38 ]. The total alkaloid 
extracts of the lotus leaf have the therapeutic function of regulating lipids of hyperlipid-
emic rats. Clinical observations showed that lotus leaves have a signiﬁ  cant role in reduc-
ing the blood lipid proﬁ  le after 3 months of treatment [ 39 ]. To further scientiﬁ  cally 
validate the data, reverse pharmacological approaches are needed.  
9.3.15     Grapes ( Vitis venifera  ) 
 Grapes are edible food, and the ﬁ  rst grape extract was used for human health more 
than 2,000 years ago. The extract of grapes, a commercially available  drakchsava  , a R. Pal and K.K. Pant
117
well-known    Indian Ayurvedic herbal preparation whose main ingredient is  Vitis 
vinifera   L., is prescribed as a cardiotonic and is administered in the treatment of 
several disorders. The use of dried grapes (also called  manakka  ) as a carditonic is 
well documented. A high-performance liquid chromatography analysis of  drakch-
sava  revealed the presence of polyphenols such as resveratrol and pterostilbene. 
Interest in this ancient formulation grew in light of the recent knowledge of resve-
ratrol [ 40 ]. 
 Besides its cardioprotective effects, resveratrol exhibits anticancer properties, as 
suggested by its ability to suppress the proliferation of a wide variety of tumor cells, 
including lymphoid and myeloid cancers, multiple myeloma, and cancer of the 
breast, prostrate, and colon. Reverse pharmacological studies suggest that the 
growth-inhibiting effects of resveratrol are mediated through cell-cycle arrest, 
upregulation of p21, p53, and Bax genes and downregulation of survivin, cyclin D1, 
cyclin E, bcl-2, and bcl-Xl, and activation of caspases. Resveratrol has been shown 
to suppress the activation of several transcription factors, including NF-kB and 
AP-1; inhibit protein kinases, including IkB α kinases, JNK, MAPK, PKC, and 
casein kinase-II; and downregulate products of genes such as COX-2, 5-LOX, 
VEGF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8 androgen receptors, and prostrate-speciﬁ  c antigens. In vivo, 
resveratrol blocks the multistep process of carcinogenesis at various stages. Besides 
its chemopreventive effects, resveratrol appears to exhibit therapeutic effects against 
cancer [ 41 ]. Limited clinical data in humans have revealed that resveratrol is quite 
safe. Currently, structural analogs of resveratrol with improved bioavailability are 
being pursued as potential therapeutic agents. 
 Some of the food-based therapeutic molecular targets are given in Table  9.2 .
9.4         Medicated Food 
 India and China have represented the hub of traditional medicines for treating and 
preventing diseases since ancient times. In the theories of traditional Chinese and 
Ayurvedic medicine, food and medicine are of equal importance in regulating the 
body’s physiology, preventing disease, or promoting recovery. In China, such food 
is known as medicated diet/food [ 42 ]. With the development of the economy and 
the continuous increases in people’s living standards, medicated diets are becoming 
increasingly valued by people, and a number of scientiﬁ  c works on medicated diets 
have been published recently [ 43 ]. Medicated food has therapeutic effects. 
Medicated/herbal tea is the mixed powder of tea with herbs, such as fruits, ﬂ  owers, 
and vegetables, which are often used as ingredients of medicated tea [ 44 ]. Fresh 
ginger and sugar tea are used to treat the wind cold-type of common cold, cough, 
and gastrointestinal problems [ 45 ]. Repeated administration of aqueous constitu-
ents of ginger augments serum corticosterone levels, and this could gradually 
induce anti-inﬂ  ammatory activity [ 22 ]. The volatile oil of ginger has protective 
antioxidant effects on carbon tetrachloride-induced damage in mice and antiplatelet 
activities in rats [ 24 ].  9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
118
9.5     Future Trends 
 Ayurveda is an indigenous system of medicine based on science. Traditional food- 
based medicine is quite common in India and China. Traditional medicine in the 
developed world is known as complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). 
Chinese traditional medicine is based on herbs that can prevent diseases and 
strengthen an individual's body. In recent years, there has been an emphasis on    Table 9.2    Molecular therapeutic target of some Ayurvedic food plants   
 Plant name  Uses  Molecular target 
 Asal rai ( Brassica 
oleracea  )  Rheumatism, sciatica, body 
massage  ↓NF-kB, ↓cdc25, ↓Bcl-2 
 Bail ( Aegel marmelos  )  Constipation, diarrhea, peptic 
ulcer respiratory disorders, 
diabetes  ↓NO 
 Dalchini ( Cinamomun 
zelanicum  )  Cold, diarrhea, edema, ﬂ  u, 
liver problem menorrhagia, 
menstrual pain, indigestion  ↓PGE 2  
 Pomegranate ( Punica 
gratum  )  Cough, digestive disorders, 
piles, pimples, dysentery  ↓NF-kB 
 Dhanyaka ( Coriandrum 
sativum  )  Menstrual disorders, skin 
diseases, conjunctivitis  ↓NF-kB, ↓AP-1, ↓JNK, ↓MAPK 
 Draksha ( Vitis 
venefera  )  Constipation, blood 
circulation, cancer  ↓COX-2, ↓iNOS, ↓JNK, ↓MEK, 
↓AP-1, ↓NF-kB, ↑p53, 
↑Caspases, ↑5-LOX 
 Jambulan ( Syzygium 
cumini  )  Diarrhea, inﬂ  ammation  ↓NF-kB 
 Mulethi ( Glycyrrhiza 
glabra  )  Constipation, mouth ulcers, 
sore throat  ↓p21 
 Mustard ( Brassica 
compestris  )  Eczema, intestinal catarrah, 
colic pain, indigestion  ↓NF-kB, ↓cdc25, ↓cdk1 ↓Bcl-2, 
↓Bcl-xL 
 Sauf ( Foeniculum 
vulgare  )  Hookworm  ↓NF-kB, ↓AP-1, ↓JNK, ↓MAPK 
 Soyabean ( Glycine 
max )  Malnutrition, allergies, 
dandruff  ↓NF-kB 
 Tulsi ( Ocimum 
sanctum  )  Anti-inﬂ  ammatory, 
expectorant, analgesic 
antitumor, antibacterial  ↓NF-kB 
 Turmeric ( Curcuma 
longa  )  Antiseptic, anti-inﬂ  ammatory, 
antioxidant  ↓NF-kB, ↓TNF, ↓AP-1, ↓IL-6, 
↓ICAM-1, ↓VCAM-1 
↓iNOS, ↓COX-2 
  Aggarwal et al. [ 33 ] 
  COX   Cyclooxygenase,  iNOS   Inducible nitric oxide synthase,  LOX  Lipoxygenase,  NF-kB   Nuclear 
factor B,  NO  Nitric oxide,  PGE   Prostaglandin E,  PKC   Protein kinase C,  cdc25   Cyclin-dependent 
calcium 25,  MAPK   Mitogen-activated protein kinase,  cdk  Cyclin-dependent kinase,  ICAM   
Intracellular cell adhesion molecule,  IL  Interleukin,  TNF  Tumor necrosis factor,  VCAM   Vascular 
cell adhesion molecule  R. Pal and K.K. Pant
119
secondary metabolites in relation to dietary components that may have a  considerable 
impact on human health. Reports from studies on animal models and in vitro sys-tems will direct future research perspectives in this area. The action of spices on reproductive functions as well as their potential role as regulators of fertility or conception is an area that holds great promise. Synergy is an important concept in spice physiology and has a pharmacokinetic basis. The components of whole spices that are not active themselves can act to improve the stability, solubility, bioavail-ability, or half-life of the active components. Hence a certain chemical might in pure form have only a fraction of the pharmacological activity that it has in its plant matrix. This suggests that measuring an individual’s food intake and assessing indi-vidual variations in the disposition, bioavailability, and metabolism of micronutri-ents might allow for more accurate and individualized nutritional approaches to dietary prescription. Dietary modiﬁ  cations will only work if they are in consonance 
with individual preferences, cultural values, and philosophical orientation toward health and disease. Traditional Indian and Chinese medicine will require extensive scientiﬁ  c research to further validate the therapeutic and preventive claims of 
 food- based herbal medicines.     
   References 
    1.   Charaka (700BC) Charaka samhita .  Chaukhamba Orientalia, Varansi  
    2.    Kapoor LD (1990) Hand book of Ayurvedic medicinal plants. CRC Press, Florida      3.   Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, Singh RH (eds) (2012) Evidence-based practice in 
complementary and alternative medicine: perspectives, protocols, problems and potentials in Ayurveda . Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg  
   4.    Achinewhu SC, Ogbonna CC, Hart AD (1995) Chemical composition of indigenous wild 
herbs, spices, fruits, nuts and leafy vegetables used as food. Plant Food Hum Nutr 48:341–348  
    5.    Chu YF, Sun J, Wu X, Liu RH (2002) Antioxidant and anti-proliferative activities of common 
vegetables. J Agric Food Chem 50(23):6910–6916  
    6.       Balentine DA, Albno MC, Nair MG (1999) Role of medicinal plants, herbs and spices in pro-
tecting human health. Nutr Rev 57 volume (9 pt2):S41–S45  
     7.    Jaouad B (ed) (2012) Nutrition, well being and health., pp 189–200. ISBN 978-953-51-0125-3      8.    Santosa S, Farnworth E, Jones JHP (2006) Probiotics and their health claims. Nutr Rev 
64(6):265–274  
    9.    Eriction KL, Hubbard NE (2000) Probiotic immunomodulation in health and disease. J Nutr 
130(2S):403S–409S  
    10.    Farnsworth NR (1985) Medicinal plant in therapy. Bull World Health Organ (WHO) 63:
695–981  
   11.    Heber D, Bowerman S (2001) What color is your diet? Heper Collins/Regan, New York     12.    Craig WJ (1999) Health-promoting properties of common herbs. Am J Clin Nutr 70:4918–4998     13.    Kochhar KP (2008) Dietary spices in health and diseases (II). Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 
52(4):327–354  
    14.    Krishnaswami K (2008) Traditional Indian spices and their health signiﬁ  cance. Asia Pac J Clin 
Nutr 17(S1):256–268  
     15.    Lawrence V A (2001) Garlic shows promise some cardiovascular risk factor. Arch Intern Med 
161:813–824  
    16.    Stevinson C, Pittler MH, Ernst E (2000) Garlic for treating hypercholesterolemia. A meta- 
analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 133:420–429  9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
120
    17.    Agarwal KC (1996) Therapeutic action of garlic constituents. Med Res Rev 16:111–124  
    18.    Block E (1985) The chemistry of garlic and onion. Sci Am 252:95–99     19.    Cavallito C, Baily JH (1994) Allicin, the antibacterial principle of  Allium sativum  , isolation, 
physical properties and antibacterial action. J Am Chem Soc 66:1944–1952  
    20.    Ohaeri OC, Adoga GI (2006) Anticoagulant modulation of blood cells and platelet reactivity 
by garlic oil in experimental diabetes mellitus. Biosci Rep 26:1–6  
    21.    Schulick P (1996) Ginger: common spice and wonder drug. Herbal Free Press, Brattleboro        22.    Hiroshi U, Katsunari I, Atsuko T (2010) Repeated oral administration of a squeezed ginger 
( Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale  ) extract augmented the serum corticosterone level and had anti- 
inﬂ ammatory properties. Biosci Biotech Biochem 74(11):2248–2252  
    23.    Phillips S, Ruggier R, Hutchinson SE (1993)  Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale   (ginger), an anti-emetic for 
day care surgery. Anesthesia 48:715–717  
     24.   Sun XS (2010) Effect of ginger extract on lipid peroxidation in liver of carbon tetrachloride 
damaged mice. Guide of China Med 8(23):26–27  
    25.    Narasimhan B, Dhake AS (2006) Antibacterial principles from  Myristica franrans   seeds. 
J Med Food 9(3):395–399  
    26.    Vijay kumar RS, Surya D, Nalini N (2004) Antioxidant efﬁ  cacy of black pepper ( Piper 
nigrum  ) and piperine in rats with high fat diet induced oxidative stress. Redox Rep 9(2):
105–110  
    27.    Bhatia SJ (2000) Red hot chilli pepper: irritating the irritable colon. Indian J Gatroenterol 
19:156–157  
     28.    Desai HG, Venugopalan K, Philipose M, Zaveri MP, Kalro RH, Anita FP (1977) Effect of red 
chilli powder on gastric mucosal barrier and secretion. Indian J Med Res 66(3):440–448  
    29.    Columbus LF (1987) Capsicum and capsaicin: past, present and future. Acta Physiol Hung 
69:265–273  
     30.    Bush TA, Cheung KJJ, Li G (2001) Curcumin induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells 
through a Fas receptors/caspase pathway independent of p53. Exp Cells Res 27(2):305–314  
    31.    Jensen-Jarolim E, Gaidzik L, Haberl I, Karaft D, Scheiner O, Graf J (1998) Hot spices inﬂ  u-
ence permeability of human intestinal epithelial monolayers. J Nutr 128:577–581  
    32.    Kitts DD (1994) Bioactive substances in food: identiﬁ  cation and potential uses. Can J Physiol 
Pharmacol 72:423–434  
     33.    Aggarwal BB, Ichikawa H, Garodia P, Weersinghe P, Sethi G, Bhat ID, Pandey MK, Shishodia 
S, Nair MG (2006) From traditional Ayurvedic medicine to modern medicine: identiﬁ  cation of 
therapeutic targets for suppression of inﬂ  ammation and cancer. Expert Opin Ther Targets 
10(1):87–118  
    34.   Goodman PS (2005) Star anise in ﬁ  ght against bird ﬂ  u: demand for a Chinese skyrockets. 
Washington Post Foreign Service, 18 Nov, p DO1  
    35.    Rai V , Mani UV , Iyer UM (1997) Effect of  Ocimum sanctum   leaf powder on blood lipopro-
teins, glycated protein and total amino acids in patients with non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Nutr Environ Med 7:113–118  
    36.    Khan BA, Abraham A, Leelamma S (1996) Biochemical response in rats to the addition of 
curry leaf ( Murraya koeigli  ) and mustard seeds to the diet. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 49:
295–299  
    37.    Sun FQ, Zhang GZ (2000) Clinical observation of bitter gourd buccal tablet in treating dia-
betic. Liaoning J Prac Diabetol 8(4):34–35  
    38.    Xie JX (2010) Clinical observation of the effect of lotus leaves on hyperlipidemia. Chronic 
Pathematol J 12(7):634  
    39.    Zang YB, Li CX, Li J, Wu YQ (2005) Study on extracted ﬂ  avonoid from lotus leaf. Food Res 
Dev 26(5):94–96  
    40.    Paul B, Masih I, Deopujari J, Charpenter C (1999) Occurrence of resveratrol and pterostilbene 
in age-old drakchsava, an Ayurvedic medicine from India. J Ethnopharmacol 68:71–76  
    41.    Steinmetz KA, Potter JD (1996) Vegetables, fruits and cancer prevention: a review. J Am Diet 
Assoc 96:1027–1039  R. Pal and K.K. Pant
121
    42.      The Pharmacopoeia Commission of PRC (eds) (2005) Pharmacopoeia of People’s Republic of 
China. Chinese Medicine and Technology Press, Beijing, ISBN 978-750-6744-37-9  
    43.    He RR, Kurihara H, Bao L, Yao XS (2008) The effect of Wang Laoji Liangcha on plasma lipid 
metabolism in restraint mice. China J Expl Trad Med Formulae 14(10):31–33  
    44.    He QT, Yu YG, Li JT, Wu H (2011) A comparative study of antioxidant activities of 20 kinds 
of herbal tea saled in the market. Food Sci 32(7):47–51  
    45.    Trevisanato SI, Kim YI (2000) Tea and health. Nutr Rev 58(1):1–10    9 Food-Based Therapeutics: A Converging Paradigm of Traditional…
123 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_10, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 201410.1            Introduction: Historical Perspectives of Fasting 
 Fasting has been practiced since time immemorial for religious, spiritual, physical, 
and psychological purposes [ 1 ]. Historically, fasting was an ancient and universal 
practice. The Romans, Babylonians, Cynics, Stoics, Pythagoreans and Neoplatonist 
philosophers extolled fasting. Adherents of Zoroastrianism practice it. Jews observe 
an annual fast on the Day of Atonement in commemoration of the descent of Moses 
from Mount Sinai after having spent 40 days fasting in order to be able to receive 
the divine revelation. Jesus observed fasting for 40 days in the desert and com-
manded his followers to fast. In brief, the practice of fasting has been common in 
one form or another in many human societies   . Before the advent of Islam, fasting 
was resorted to by way of repentance or penance, to celebrate some particular occa-
sion, or to control an epidemic   . The form of fasting also differed. For example, Jews 
ate only once in 24 h. In fact, in ancient faiths and creeds, the objects of fasting were 
very limited, the intention generally being self- mortiﬁ  cation, self-denial, or the sat-
isfaction of some superstitious urge. In Islam, fasting entails not simply refraining 
from eating or drinking but carries the added signiﬁ  cance of worship, psychological 
comfort, morality, and legislation. It is neither the irrational motionlessness of pre-
Islamic Arabs nor the mere abstaining from eating and drinking; it represents the 
building of one’s character, exerting control over one ʼs desires, and inspiring one 
toward social and scientiﬁ  c creativity [ 2 ]. 
 Fasting as a religious observance has long been practiced for the accomplish-
ment of certain goods. Religious fasting is of early origin, antedating recorded his-
tory. Partial or total abstinence from food, or from certain kinds of food, in certain     Chapter 10   
 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, 
Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective 
             Rajiv     Rastogi      and     Devesh     Rastogi   
        R.   Rastogi      ( *) 
  Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy ,   New Delhi ,  India   
 e-mail: rrastogi2009@gmail.com   
    D.   Rastogi    
  Indulgence Food Pvt. Ltd. ,   Nagpur ,  India    
124
seasons, was prevalent in Assyria, Persia, Babylon, Scythia, Greece, Rome, India, 
Nineveh, Palestine, China, Northern Europe among the Druids, and in the Americas 
among the Native Americans. It was a widely diffused practice, often indulged in as 
a means of penitence or mourning and as a preparation for participation in religious 
rites, such as baptism and communion [ 3 ].  
10.2     Fasting in Indian Scriptures 
 Hindu scriptures contain abundant references to fasting as a method of attaining 
greater purity and strength in body and mind with the aim of achieving a desired 
goal with the blessings of the presiding deity. Hindu scriptures mention an ancient 
saint,  Dadhichi  , whose bones became very strong due to perennial fasting, and Indra 
(King of Gods) used those bones to make his weapon Vajra to ﬁ  ght demons [ 4 ]. 
In  Rigveda  , fasting is considered supreme medicine for eliminating accumulated 
toxins from the body. The  Bhagavat Gita   has elucidated in detail the three varieties 
of food,  Sattvik, Tamasik  , and  Rajasik  , and their effects on the human body and 
mind [ 5 ]. The  Anushasan   chapter of  Mahabharata   says : 
  Whosoever fasts is blessed in every way, 
 He draws the beneﬁ  ts of all the great medicines, 
 All his diseases are cured and he becomes strong and virile. [ 6 ] 
   The  Manu Smriti  , while setting down the rules and regulations regarding per-
sonal hygiene, explains the methods of fasting [ 4 ]. 
 Ayurveda mentions fasting as a process of “making one lighter”( langhana  ). 
When properly done, it is a process of revitalization [ 7 ]. 
 In modern times, fasting has been used as a contemporary tool to raise one ʼs 
voice in protest against societal ills. Several notable people were able    to evoke mass 
public sentiment due to this   . Mahatma Gandhi (India) was an exemplar of the use of 
fasting for nonpersonal reasons [ 8 ]. In 1933, when Gandhi was on his tenth day of 
fasting, he was examined by his physicians. One of the physicians stated that 
“despite his 64 years, from a physiological point of view the Indian leader is as 
healthy as a man of 40” [ 4 ]. Dr. Herbert Shelton, in his book  The Science and Fine 
Art of Fasting  , also refers to the fasting of Jayaprakash Narayan, leader of the Indian 
Socialist party, who fasted for 21 days, which enabled him to better fulﬁ  ll his public 
duties. He underwent this puriﬁ  cation fast at a nature cure clinic under the supervi-
sion of the clinician who had supervised several of Gandhi’s fasts [ 3 ].  
10.3     Understanding Fasting 
 A fast constitutes an abstinence from speciﬁ  c food items. Fasting is a period of 
abstinence during which the fast is observed. Fluids are consumed in sufﬁ  cient 
quantity to satisfy thirst and physiologic requirements. In the absence of food, the R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
125
body systematically cleanses itself and consumes stored food. Starvation occurs 
only when the body uses up what is stored and is forced to survive on protein. Although protein is used by the body during a fast, a person fasting for even 40 days on water will not suffer from a deﬁ  ciency of protein, vitamins, minerals, or fatty 
acids. During the breakdown of unhealthy cells, all essential substances are used and conserved in a most extraordinary manner. There is an unwarranted fear that during fasting, strength diminishes from the catabolism of proteins from muscle ﬁ bers. Even during long fasts, the number of muscle ﬁ  bers remains the same. 
Although healthy cells may be reduced in size and strength for a time, they remain perfectly sound. 
 A. J. Carlson, professor of physiology at the University of Chicago, states that a 
healthy, well-nourished man can live from 50 to 75 days without food, provided he is not exposed to harsh elements or emotional stress. Human fat is valued at 3,500 cal per pound. Each extra pound of fat will supply enough calories for 1 day of hard physical labor. Ten pounds of fat are equal to 35,000 cal! Most of us have sufﬁ  cient 
reserves that are capable of sustaining us for many weeks. 
 Rest is understood to be a big factor in enhancing recovery, because it is when 
the body is at rest that it is able to direct the most energy toward the various chemi-cal and mechanical processes of detoxiﬁ  cation. When fasting, a person experiences 
recovery at a rate that is swifter than normal. He is ridding his body of toxins and excesses, allowing the body to use its own wisdom to healthfully reorganize itself from the atomic level. As the toxic load is reduced, the functioning of every cell is enhanced. The human body has many ordinary modes of achieving elimination, for example, the liver, lungs, kidneys, and colon. When these are overloaded, the body will resort to “extra ordinary” methods of elimination: boils, mucus and other dis-charges, sweat, vomiting, diarrhea, and many others. Should elimination be impos-sible or uneconomical of body energy, the toxic overload will go into storage forms in the joints, vessels, muscles, and organs – almost any tissue in the body. While fasting, the body is highly conservative of its energy and resources. During this deep and profound rest, toxin intake and production are reduced to a minimum, while autolysins and elimination proceed unchecked. Anabolic processes such as tissue and bone healing also proceed at a maximal rate during fasting. 
 In the body, the ﬁ  rst stage of cleansing removes large quantities of waste matter 
and digestive residues. The ﬁ  rst few days of a fast can be rough due to the quantity 
of waste passing into the blood stream. The tongue becomes coated and the breath foul as the body excretes waste through every opening. After the third day of the fast, there is little desire for food. The second stage is the cleansing of mucus, fat, and diseased and dying cells, and that more easily removes toxins. As the fast con-tinues, the cleansing process becomes more thorough. The last stage is the cleansing of toxins that have been accumulating in cellular tissues and in the microscopic channels transporting vital elements everywhere in the body. Cleansing of the last layer is only possible through a combination of juice fasting, water fasting, and a healthy diet high in raw foods. To overcome a severe disease like cancer, it is impor-tant to continue through a series of fasts, to the point where the full scouring action of catabolism removes the disease from the tissue. 10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
126
 During extended fasts the body removes dead, dying, and diseased cells; 
unwanted fatty tissue, trans-fatty acids, and the hardened coating of mucus on the 
intestinal wall; toxic waste matter in the lymphatic system and bloodstream; toxins 
in the spleen, liver, and kidney; mucus from the lungs and sinuses and toxins imbed-
ded in cellular ﬁ  bers and deeper organ tissues; deposits in the microscopic tubes 
responsible for nourishing brain cells; and excess cholesterol. 
 Nearly everyone who fasts discovers the same thing: when they fast, they actu-
ally have no hunger yet have more energy than usual [ 9 ].  
10.4     Why Fast? 
 Probably the most important reason to fast is that the body uses quite a bit of energy 
to digest food, and during fasting this energy becomes available for other uses. 
During the fasting state, the body scours for dead cells, damaged tissues, fatty 
deposits, tumors, and abscesses, all of which are used as fuel that eventually gets 
exhausted. The elimination of these obstructions restores the immune system func-
tionality and metabolic process to an optimum state. Fasting restores good digestion 
and elimination, and peristaltic action is quickened. Fasting allows the digestive 
organs to have a deep, physiological rest, and the energy saved goes to self-healing 
and self-repairing. By eliminating obstructions, cleansing, detoxifying, and purify-
ing the intestines, blood, and cells, we can overcome many of our physical ailments 
or handicaps and obtain an energy boost. Fasting not only removes obstructions and 
helps the body heal itself; it is also rejuvenating and life-extending. These resulting 
beneﬁ  ts can have lasting effects on the mental and emotional health of a person. 
 The other very important aspect of fasting is that one’s self-awareness will be 
elevated. If one is sick and depressed, then this might be the most important thing 
one can try in a healing program because it gives an immediate energy boost and 
increased awareness that might allow a clearer perspective, making possible the ﬁ  rst 
step out of sickness and onto the path of recovery. While fasting one becomes more 
aware of bodily processes and life in general. It becomes a period where one can 
engage in objective introspection since more free time is available for contempla-
tion because of avoidance of time used for food preparation and eating. One becomes 
more aware of what the body likes and dislikes when one starts to eat again. Self- 
conﬁ dence in the ability to control one ʼs own life process is also increased [ 9 ].  
10.5     Fasting as a Curative Practice 
 The practice of fasting for the treatment of physical ailments dates back to prehis-
toric periods, with wild animals experiencing the avoidance of food as a method of 
treatment [ 10 ]. For more than 2,000 years now fasting has been advocated and prac-
ticed as a rule in connection to religious ceremonies [ 11 ]. Hippocrates R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
127
recommended fasting regularly to many of his patients. He asserted that when you 
feed the sick, you feed the disease. On the other hand, if you withhold food, disease 
ebbs away [ 4 ]. 
 Plutarch said: “Instead of using medicine, better fast a day [ 8 ].” 
 During the sixteenth century, the renowned Swiss physician Paracelsus claimed 
that “Fasting is the greatest remedy.” In the seventeenth century, Dr. Hoffman wrote 
a book titled  Description of the Magniﬁ  cent Results Obtained Through Fasting in 
All Diseases.   Dr. Anton Nikolai followed in the next century with recommendations 
of fasting instead of food for those who were ill. Later, Dr. V on Seeland of Russia 
wrote: “As a result of experiments I have come to the conclusion that fasting is not 
only a therapeutic of the highest degree possible but also deserves consideration 
educationally.” In Germany, Dr. Adolph Mayer asserted that “fasting is the most 
efﬁ cient means of correcting any disease,” and Dr. Moeller wrote that “fasting is the 
only natural evolutionary method whereby through a systemic cleansing, you can 
restore yourself by degrees to physiologic normality” [ 8 ]. 
10.5.1     Conditions Where Fasting Is Beneﬁ  cial 
 Although fasting is not recommended in every situation (cancer of the liver is one 
instance where fasting is contraindicated), in many other situations fasting is the 
only known solution. Fasting has been beneﬁ  cial for arthritis, asthma, high blood 
pressure, lupus, chronic fatigue, colitis, Crohn’s disease, diverticulitis, spastic 
colon, irritable bowel, paralysis, neuritis, neuralgia, neuroses, and mental illness, as 
well as many others. Fasting may also lead to the breaking down of tumor cells, and 
for this reason many people have overcome cancer by fasting. 
 Fasting is the gateway to health [ 6 ]. It is considered a universal remedy for treat-
ing most disease conditions and is especially recommended in treating disorders 
such as, for example, indigestion, constipation, ﬂ  atulence, hyperacidity, bronchial 
asthma, obesity, high blood pressure, and gout [ 21 ].  
10.5.2     Beneﬁ  ts of Fasting 
 Fasting is linked with many beneﬁ  ts for the healthy as well as to the sick. A few 
such beneﬁ  ts are observed commonly during a supervised fast.
   Clearing of the mind and improved perception  
  Rapid yet safe weight loss  
  Increased energy level  
  Revitalization of the organs 
 Harmonization    of cellular biochemistry  
  Rejuvenation of the skin  
  Ease of movement  10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
128
  Fuller, freer, and deeper breathing  
  Rejuvenation of digestive system to become more effective; strengthening of peri-
staltic action of intestines  
  Increased conﬁ  dence in our ability to have control over our lives and our appetite 
and that our body is self-regulating and self-healing  
  Realization that our organism is capable of establishing balance when given the 
opportunity to do so  
  Normalization of metabolic cycle and cell oxygenation  
  Detoxiﬁ  cation: as soon as the body realizes it is fasting, it will begin to eliminate 
those things that cause disease, such as, for example, dead cells, cellular plaques, 
mucus, and tumors [ 9 ] .      
10.5.3     Fasting Enhances Mental Acuity 
 Perhaps the most instructive testimony as to the acuteness of mental powers during 
fasting comes from Dr. Herbert Shelton, who supervised the fasting of more than 
40,000 people over a period of 50 years. His message is that the freer the body is of 
toxic materials ﬂ  owing through the blood and lymphatic system, the clearer is the 
ability to think. 
 These facts are due to physiological causes. Large amounts of blood and nervous 
system energies must be sent to the digestive organs to digest a meal. If these ener-
gies are not required there, they may be used by the brain for better thinking. This 
increase in mental acuity does not usually happen until after the ﬁ  rst few days of a 
fast because the body is busy cleaning out excess toxins and substances, and so the 
ﬁ rst few days can be a period of depression, with headaches and various pains as the 
process gets under way. This makes the ﬁ  rst stage of fasting difﬁ  cult, but after the 
body has thrown off its load of toxins, the brain is fed by a cleaner bloodstream and 
the mental powers and clarity of thought are extraordinarily increased, and the other 
senses also become more acute. 
 One’s mind becomes clearer and one’s ability to think and solve intricate prob-
lems is enhanced. One is simply more alert, and one’s mind seems to open up into 
new ﬁ  elds. The mental and physical senses are heightened, and often there can be a 
feeling of euphoria, especially during longer fasts. Some, for the ﬁ  rst time, will 
experience emotional stability. The reasons for this are manifold – the elimination 
of the emotional dependence on food, exclusion of stimulating foods like caffeine, 
processed sugars, recreational drugs, tobacco, and trans-fatty acids, all of which can 
have a devastating effect on delicate emotions. 
 Dr. Ehret stated an amazing fact at the turn of the twentieth century. He said that, 
for a water fast to awaken the higher mental functions, it had to be longer than 21 
days. Fasting has a history of awakening intuitive senses, creativity, and deeper 
spiritual questions in those with enough determination to get past the 21-day mark.  R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
129
10.5.4     Healing Through Fasting 
 During a fast, a metamorphosis occurs. The body undergoes a tearing down and 
rebuilding of damaged materials. For this reason, fasting is known for its ability to rejuvenate the body and give it a more youthful tone. Why does fasting have such a powerful effect in healing the body? Fasting dissolves diseased cells in a systematic manner, leaving healthy tissues behind. The result is a thorough cleansing of the vessels, membranes, and cellular components. There is a remarkable redistribution of nutrients in the fasting body. It hangs on to precious minerals and vitamins while catabolizing old tissue, toxins, and inferior materials. 
 Each cell of the body is a complete living entity with its own metabolism. It 
needs a constant supply of oxygen and sufﬁ  cient nourishment. Due to    nutritional 
deﬁ ciencies, sluggish metabolism, sedentary lifestyle, overeating, and consequent 
poor digestion and assimilation of food, a lack of fresh air, and sufﬁ  cient exercise 
and rest, cells get deprived and start to degenerate. The normal process of cell replacement and rebuilding slows down and the body starts to grow old, its resis-tance to disease diminishes, and it becomes sick. 
 Animals naturally fast when they are sick or injured. Incidentally, when humans 
are ill, the appetite diminishes. If we step out of the way and allow nature to take its course, we will ﬁ  nd that we can heal ourselves of any ill. Since the dawn of recorded 
time, in fact, since before the word “doctor” came into existence, priests provided sanctuaries where people could go to fast. Modern medical practitioners admit they have no cures, only drugs that mask the symptoms while causing yet other symp-toms to emerge.   
10.6     Fasting as a Therapeutic Modality: Empirical Evidences 
 The empirical evidences of fasting are numerous. It affects the skin, gastrointestinal system, and excretory system and rejuvenates the body. In the words of Dr. Shelton, “The skin becomes more youthful, acquires a better color and better texture. The eyes clear up and become brighter. One looks younger. The visible rejuvenation in the skin is matched by evidences of similar but invisible rejuvenation throughout the body.” 
 During a fast, the assimilative powers of the body increase. This is shown through 
an improved state of the blood during the rapid assimilation of food after the fast. The assimilation of food after a fast reaches the highest possible levels. Kagan observed that when rabbits were fasted for 17 days, they gained 56 % of their weight on a diet that, under usual conditions, would barely be sufﬁ  cient to maintain a state 
of equilibrium. People who are chronically underweight, in spite of eating heavily, often gain weight to the normal level after a fast, even if large quantities of food are not consumed. The improved assimilation enables the body to utilize more of the food it has consumed. Fasting offers the body ʼs organs the closest possible state to 10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
130
total physiological rest. Many organs are overworked and overstimulated, and hence 
weakened, through the constant inﬂ  ux of substrates and metabolites. During a fast, 
the work done by the organs is reduced to the lowest possible minimum. In the 
absence of further intake, the body redistributes the elements already stored within. 
Thus, the organs are given a chance to recuperate and restore their vital powers. 
Because there are no additional foods to deal with, damaged structures may be 
repaired in the meantime. Broken bones, wounds, and open sores heal much more 
rapidly during a fast. Any inﬂ  ammation that may be present tends to subside. The 
body undergoes a general healing process. 
 Associated with the physiological rest of an organ is increased elimination. This is 
one valuable advantage of fasting. Part of the energy that would normally be devoted 
to the work of assimilation may, during a fast, be used to expel any accumulated 
waste and toxins. Decomposed food in the digestive tract, which often acts as a source 
of toxins, is quickly eliminated through the process of fasting. A marked improve-
ment in nervous and mental functions occurs during a fast. Fasting thus serves many 
purposes in terms of physiology and biochemistry. It rejuvenates tissues, induces 
autolysis of abnormal growths, improves digestive and assimilatory powers, reestab-
lishes normal bodily chemistry and secretion, gives bodily organs a physiological 
rest, increases elimination, promotes nerve conduction, strengthens the mind, and 
perhaps improves bodily functions in various ways that we do not yet understand [ 8 ].  
10.7     Fasting as a Therapeutic Modality: 
Contemporary Evidences 
10.7.1     Physiology of Fasting and Hypothesis 
 Fasting is merely a digestive and physiological rest during which the body is enabled 
to devote all its energy to the elimination of accumulated waste, toxins, and undesir-
able material that might be responsible for diseases [ 1 ]. Fasting (abstention from all 
food and drink except water), combined with total rest (whenever possible), is the 
most logical and most valuable approach to regaining full health [ 12 ]. 
 The primary function of fasting is to allow the gastrointestinal tract to rest and 
permit the system to turn its energies away from the processing of a continuously 
incoming stream of food and concentrate instead on the process of cleansing [ 7 ]. 
Dr. H. Lindlahr says that “in most cases proper adjustment of diet, both as to quality 
and quantity, together with the various forms of natural treatment, must precede 
fasting. The great majority of patients have become chronic because their skin, kid-
neys, intestines and other organs of elimination work sluggishly. As a result the 
system overloads with morbid matter which again reabsorbs unless promptly elimi-
nated to prevent reabsorption” [ 13 ]. 
 Foremost among the methods of puriﬁ  cation is fasting [ 13 ]. It is characterized as 
a healing measure of nature [ 14 ]. It is undoubtedly one of the most potent and 
cheapest of all natural remedies. The reason that it is not more universally applied R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
131
is that society at large, as well as the medical profession, is under the impression 
that the interruption of eating for a brief period will greatly reduce the vitality of the 
individual [ 15 ]. 
 Dr. Gian-Cursio, in the  Journal of Natural Hygiene   (1955–1956), explains this 
process clearly when he says that the chief function of the body during a fast is “to 
obtain within itself the elements essential to life,” and that “removal of toxins stored 
in the cells is secondary to the more basic function of supplying the body (the vital 
or functioning tissues) with the (nutritive) essentials of life during the fast” [ 10 ,  16 ].   
10.8     Perspectives of Fasting in  Ayurveda   
 Fasting ( langhana  ) is given its due importance in Ayurveda and is counted as one of 
the six primary therapeutic measures ( shada-upakramas  ) [ 11 ]. It is considered a 
primary remedy in the treatment of diseases arising from excess intake of food ( san-
tarpana  ).  Langhana   produces  laghutva   (lightness) [ 17 ].  
10.9     Perspectives of Fasting in Naturopathy 
 Fasting represents  Akasha tatva  , i.e., space, one of the  pancha-mahabhootas.   
Fasting is the most convenient method of cleansing the body and getting rid of dis-
ease [ 18 ]. According to Dr. Carington, a specialist in fast therapy, a fast starts with 
leaving the ﬁ  rst meal and ends when the feeling of a genuine appetite appears. Fast 
is an excellent method for physical, mental, and spiritual uplift, but its advantages 
can be realized only if it is done systematically [ 18 ]. 
 Naturopathy accepts fasting as a therapy for the treatment of most disorders. 
During fasting, the body recoups considerably the  Aakash tatva   (space element) [ 6 ]. 
Dr. Herbert M. Shelton worked extensively on fasting and successfully treated thou-
sands of patients suffering from various chronic ailments [ 19 ,  20 ]. He shared his 
experiences with fasting in his book  Fasting Can Save Your Life  . The success of 
fasting also depends on the process through which it is broken. The rules for 
 breaking a fast as recommended in naturopathy are as follows:
   Take several days to gradually transition back to the normal diet.  
  Eat slowly and chew food thoroughly.  
  Do not overeat.    
 Naturopathy believes that fasting is a process of giving rest to the digestive sys-
tem. During this process, the vital energy that digests food is wholly engaged in the 
elimination of diseases from the body [ 21 ]. 
 Mahatma Gandhi stated his views on fasting in his book  Key to Health  : “ We must 
not ﬁ  ll up the digestive tract with unnecessary food stuffs. We should eat only as 
much as we need and not more. Often one over eats or eats indigestible things 10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
132
without being aware of them. An occasional fast, say once a week or once a fort-
night, will enable one to keep the balance. If one is unable to fast for the whole day 
one should miss one or more meals during the day”   [ 22 ].  
10.10     Methods of Fasting 
 Fasting can be done with water, fruit juices, or raw vegetable juices. Short fasts may 
be done with water alone. The safest and most effective method of fasting is a lime 
juice and honey fast. The body burns up and eliminates the accumulated wastes during 
fasting. This cleansing process is accelerated by drinking alkaline juices prepared 
from fresh fruits or vegetables. Preserved juices are not recommended during fasting. 
 Complete emptying of the bowel is important before the start of fasting. This can 
be done by taking an enema. Enemas may be used every day during the period of 
fasting. During a fast the digestive system consumes and expels large quantities of 
accumulated waste matter [ 23 ]. Since considerable energy is spent during fasting, in 
the process of elimination of accumulated poisons and toxic waste materials, during 
the fast, patients are advised to take as much physical and mental rest as possible. 
 The duration of a fast is an important factor. It depends on various factors, i.e., 
the age of the individual, the nature of the disease, the amount and type of drugs 
consumed earlier, and various other circumstances. However, there are no hard and 
fast rules dictating the length of a fast. Each case is handled according to the speciﬁ  c 
needs of the individual [ 24 ]. In naturopathy, patients are usually advised to under-
take short fasts of 2–3 days with proper rest during fasting. Fasting is not advised in 
tuberculosis and diabetic conditions. 
 One should feel healthy and tension free while fasting. The beneﬁ  ts of a fast 
enhances    by avoiding stimulating thoughts and by making the mind peaceful and 
cheerful. One can realize a fast ʼs advantages by having a strong will and positive 
thoughts [ 25 ]. 
 Fasting has been appropriately called “a rest for metabolism.” There is no doubt 
that the digestive and endocrine glands that are the agents of control of the meta-
bolic processes are given a rest and thus permitted to normalize both their structures 
and their activities as a result of the fast. The excretory organs do not rest during a 
fast. On the contrary, they increase their activities. There can be no doubt that this 
increased excretion is largely responsible for much of the beneﬁ  ts that ﬂ  ow from a 
period of abstinence [ 19 ].  
10.11     Role of Fasting in Various Disease Conditions 
 Fasting is an excellent treatment for removing the disorders of mind and body [ 21 ]. 
Dr. K.M. Modi in his book  Health Farming   refers to his experiments on 1,189 fast-
ing individuals between April 1970 and November 1974 at Arogya Mandir, R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
133
Gorakhpur, India. Fasts were undertaken for 3 days to 3 weeks and in a few cases up 
to 5 weeks. The results were encouraging. A total of 69.67 % cases completely 
recovered from their illness, 26.99 % cases showed improvement, and in only 
3.33 % cases did fasting not help [ 4 ]. 
 Old age brings a decrease in the metabolic rate. However, fasting produces reju-
venation by inducing a permanent increase in the metabolic rate. In experiments 
conducted at the Hull Biological Laboratory at the University of Chicago, both dogs 
and humans were fasted for extended periods. During fasts of 30–40 days, a 5–6 % 
increase in the metabolic rate was observed [ 8 ]. 
 Various studies have been conducted on the role of fasting in the management of 
various disorders, for example, bronchial asthma, hypertension, musculoskeletal 
disorders, and anxiety, and fasting therapy (FT) has proven effective in the manage-
ment of these lifestyle and psychosomatic disorders. 
 Michalsen et al. [ 26 ] conducted    a controlled, nonrandomized pilot study that 
compared two inpatient treatment strategies, an integrative medicine (IM) approach 
that included FT and a conventional rheumatology (CM) approach in ﬁ  bromyalgia. 
IM used a fasting cure and mind-body medicine as speciﬁ  c methods. Findings indi-
cate that a multimodal IM treatment with FT might be superior to CM in the short 
term and noninferior in the midterm [ 26 ]. 
 In a controlled, nonrandomized study on the inﬂ  uence of a Mediterranean diet or 
a fasting cure on the intestinal microﬂ  ora, a subgroup of patients with ﬁ  bromyalgia 
experienced greater improvement than nonfasters [ 27 ]. Prolonged modiﬁ  ed fasting 
(fasting cure, FT) with deﬁ  ned periods of voluntary abstention from solid food and 
a daily total energy intake of <500 kcal has been found effective in several random-
ized trials on rheumatoid arthritis [ 28 ,  29 ]. The anti-inﬂ  ammatory, pain-relieving, 
antinociceptive, and mood-enhancing effects of fasting and caloric restriction have 
been well described in experimental and clinical studies [ 30 ,  31 ]. Both patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis and ﬁ  bromyalgia frequently report that elimination diets and 
meal skipping alleviate their symptoms [ 27 ,  32 ,  33 ]. In another trial with a hetero-
geneous sample of chronic pain patients, fasting led to an amelioration of mood and 
well-being [ 34 ]. 
 Arankalle [ 34 ] stressed that a monitored treatment protocol of naturopathy and 
yoga can beneﬁ  t a large number of musculoskeletal disorders. An ideal treatment 
protocol in naturopathy involves correcting an individual ʼs lifestyle and implementing 
therapeutic fasting, followed by diet modiﬁ  cations and using modalities like hydro-
therapy, mud therapy, massotherapy, physiotherapy, yoga, and exercise therapy [ 35 ]. 
 Kanazawa and Fukudo [ 34 ] suggested that FT may have beneﬁ  cial effects on 
intractable patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) [ 34 ]. Body mass index and 
plasma leptin concentrations concomitantly and signiﬁ  cantly decreased during fast-
ing, whereas serum orexin concentrations signiﬁ  cantly increased and were nega-
tively correlated with plasma leptin concentrations in nonobese adults (Komaki 
et al. 2001). Fasting affects immune variables such as T-cell subsets and natural 
killer cell activity at least in part through changes in adrenal-gland-related hormones 
(Komaki et al. 1997). FT caused high magnitude rapid changes in immune and 
endocrine variables, similar to those that occur during various psychological and 10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
134
environmental stresses (Manuck et al. 1991). Huber et al. [ 35 ] showed that, in con-
trast to total fasting and fasting with limited physical activity, 8 days of juice fasting 
without limitation of physical activity results in a decrease in free cholesterol and an 
only an initial increase of low-density lipoprotein    (LDL) cholesterol. The study 
showed that after 8 days insulin, tryglycerides (TG), and very low density lipopro-
tein (VLDL) were still lower than at baseline; however, they increased compared to 
the initial phase, probably counter regulatory to a further increase in nonessential 
fatty acids (NEFA) [ 35 ].  
10.12     Conclusions 
 Both Ayurveda and naturopathy consider fasting a reliable remedy for several dis-
eases [ 18 ]. Based on the foregoing discussion, it can be concluded that fasting is a 
puriﬁ  catory process that has been used since antiquity with great health beneﬁ  ts in 
terms of purifying the body and mind. Therapeutic fasting is used in naturopathic 
hospitals as an important practice and treatment modality with great potential. 
Though various studies have been conducted on FT, more scientiﬁ  c, clinical, and 
long-term studies are still needed to assess the clinical impact of FT and to establish 
the effectiveness of FT as evidence-based medicine for the management of various 
lifestyle and psychosomatic disease conditions.     
      References 
     1.    Jussawalla JM (1993) Natural dietetics. Vikas Publishing House, New Delhi, 49, 48, 50  
    2 .      http://www.herald.co.zw    . Downloaded 26 May 2013  
     3.    Shelton HM (1978) The science and ﬁ  ne art of fasting. Natural Hygiene Press, Chicago, 52, 
49, 50  
        4.    Modi KM (1989) Health farming. Health Farm Publications, Bombay, 89, 90, 92, 91, 102, 103  
    5.      Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada AC (2011) Bhagavad-Gita as it is. Bhaktivedanta Book 
Trust, Mumbai  
      6.    Dewan AP (1999) Healthy living. AC Specialist Publishers, New Delhi, p 84  
     7.    Ballentine R (1989) Diet & Nutrition-A holistic approach. The Himalayan International 
Institute, Honesdale, 381, 383  
        8.    De Vries A (1963) Therapeutic fasting. Chandler Book Company, Los Angeles, 10, 5, 6, 11, 
12, 13, 14, 15  
      9 .      http://www.falconblanco.com/health/fasting.htm    . Downloaded 26 May 2013  
     10.    Brown HR (1961) The fast way to health and vigour. Thorsons Publishers, London, W.C.2 ; 
20, 21, 23  
     11.    Carrington H (1978) Fasting the master remedy. Nature Cure Research Hospital, Lucknow, 16, 
8, 9  
    12.      Upton D (1963) The effects of fasting. Gram Bhavna Prakashan, Pattikalyana/Haryana, 27, 3  
     13.    Lindlahr H (1990) Philosophy and practice of nature cure. Sat Sahitya Sahayogi Sangh, 
Hyderabad, 327, 322  
    14.    Buchinger HE (1980) About fasting. Thorson Publishers, Northamptonshire, 7  R. Rastogi and D. Rastogi
135
    15.    Lindlahr H (1990) Practice of natural therapeutics. Sat Sahitya Sahayogi Sangh, Hyderabad, 115  
    16.       Moyle A (1950) Nature cure explained. Health for All, Henrietta Street, Strand, W.C.2. 
Westminster, 102, 104, 105  
    17.    Singh RH (1998) The holistic principles of Ayurvedic medicine. Chaukarba Sanskrit 
Pratishthan, Delhi, 87, 88  
      18.    Rastogi R (2001) An introduction to naturopathy. Asha Prakashan, Agra, 45, 46       19.    Shelton HM (1978) Fasting for renewal of life. Natural Hygiene Press, Chicago, 115      20.    Shelton HM (1978) Fasting can save your life. Natural Hygiene Press, Chicago        21.   (1999) Yogic and Nature cure treatments for Common ailments. CCRYN Publication, 
New Delhi, 12  
    22.    Gandhi MK (1999) Key to health. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 43      23.    Hiralal (1990) Health through raw eating. Jan Swasthya Prakashan, Magawara/Unnao, 206      24.    Jaggi OP (1991) Health care for plus ﬁ  fty. Hind Pocket Books, New Delhi, 44  
    25.    Rastogi R (2003) Food principles for healthy living. Chaukhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan, Delhi, 40       26.    Michalsen A, Li C, Kaiser K, Lüdtke R, Larissa M, Rainer S, Kessler C (2013) Patient treat-
ment of ﬁ  bromyalgia: a controlled nonrandomized comparison of conventional medicine ver-
sus integrative medicine including fasting therapy. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2013:908610  
     27.   Michalsen A, Riegert M, Lüdtke R, et al. (2005) Mediterranean diet of extented fasting’s inﬂ  u-
ence on changing the intestinal microﬂ  ora, immunoglobulin A secretion and clinical outcome 
in patients with rheumatiod arthritis and ﬁ  bromyalgia: an observational study. BMC 
Complement Alternat Med 5, article 22  
    28.   Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Haugen M, Borchgrevink CF, et al. (1991) Controlled trial of fasting and 
one-year vegetarian diet in rheumatoid arthritis. The Lancet 338(8772):899–902; Müller H, Wilhelmi de Toledo F, Resch KL (2000) A systematic review of clinical studies on fasting and vegetarian diets in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Scandinavian J Rheumatol 30:1–10  
    29.    Johnstone AM (2007) Fasting-the ultimate diet? Obes Rev 8(3):211–222      30.    Michalsen A (2010) Prolonged fasting as a method of mood enhancement in chronic pain 
syndromes: a review of clinical evidence and mechanisms. Curr Pain Headache Rep 14(2):80–87  
    31.   Haugen M, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Nordvag BY , Forre O (1991) Diet and disease symptoms in 
rheumatic diseases. Results of a questionnaire based survey. Clin Rheumatol 10(4):401–407; Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Haugen M, Fforre O (1992) Diet therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. The Lancet 339(8787, article 250)  
    32.    Michalsen A, Schneider S, Rodenbeck A, Lüdtke R, Huether G, Dobos GJ (2003) The short- 
term effects of fasting on the neuroendocrine system in patients with chronic pain syndromes. Nutr Neurosci 6(1):11–18  
    33.    Arankalle DV (2013) Integrating naturopathy and yoga in management of musculoskeletal 
disorders. Int J Prev Med 4(1):120–121  
       34.    Kanazawa M, Fukudo S (2006) Effects of fasting therapy on irritable bowel syndrome. Int J 
Behav Med 13(3):214–220  
      35.    Huber R, Nauck M, Ludtke R, Scharnagl H (2003) Effects of one week juice fasting on lipid 
metabolism: a cohort study in healthy subjects. Forsch Komplementarmed Klass Naturheilkd 10(1):7–10    10 Fasting as a Curative Practice: Historical, Traditional, and Contemporary Perspective
   Part III 
   Ayurvedic Food Science: 
Challenges of Proving its Uniqueness 
in the Purview of Science        
13911.1            Introduction 
11.1.1     Theory of Nutrition in Ayurveda 
 In Ayurveda, food plays a critical role in maintaining health and preventing disease. 
Indeed, Ayurveda stresses  Anna   (food) and  Ahara   (diet) as being key to health, 
wellness, and a good life [ 1 ]. Healthy, natural, and wholesome food is considered to 
nourish the body as well as the mind and the soul. Health centers on food in 
Ayurveda, good digestion depends upon our lifestyle, and our lifestyle depends 
upon a whole host of socioeconomic and environmental factors that can affect how 
food is grown and processed. Thus our environment affects the quality of our food, 
which in turn affects the quality of our health [ 2 ]. Ayurveda links nutrition and good 
digestion with our environment [ 2 ], and in our modern era how we live is radically 
different from the previous thousands of years. Yet we are not well educated about 
how the modern environment affects our food, particularly in terms of pollution, 
genetic engineering, farming practices, freezing, microwaving, and processing with 
chemical additives and how these practices affect our health. 
 Ayurveda has recommended for thousands of years that warm, cooked foods 
should be eaten because they are easily digested. However, overcooking should be 
avoided as that depletes the life force of the food. Additionally, cooking with too 
much heavy oil should be avoided as it can lead to weakening of the digestive ﬁ  re. 
It is proposed that food is best eaten when cooked or steamed rather than raw. Eating 
large amounts of raw food should be avoided because raw foods are considered to 
be less nutritive and building. However, fruit is better fresh and uncooked [ 3 ]. 
Organic, fresh, and homegrown foods are suggested, and the diet can be either     Chapter 11   
 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary 
Practices as They Relate to Food Practices 
in Ayurveda 
              Diana     I.     Lurie      
         D.  I.   Lurie         ( *) 
  Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences , 
 The University of Montana ,   Missoula ,  MT   59812 ,  USA   
 e-mail: diana.lurie@mso.umt.edu  
S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_11, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
140
vegetarian or nonvegetarian. Portion size and content are tailored to the individual, 
the season, and environmental and personal factors that impact the individual. 
Ayurveda very strongly states that wholesome food promotes health while unwhole-
some food results in disease [ 1 ]. So how does Ayurveda deﬁ  ne unwholesome food 
as it relates to our modern world? 
 A good example is the modern microwave. Microwaved food is considered to be 
damaging to the life force of food and should be avoided in Ayurveda. Yet micro-
waves are a fact of life in the twenty-ﬁ  rst century, and many turn to the microwave 
as an easy and cost-effective way to prepare a nutritious meal given the time con-
straints of our busy modern lifestyles. Another important concept in Ayurveda is the 
avoidance of ice-cold food and drinks. Cold food and drinks are thought to have a 
negative impact on digestion by extinguishing  jathar agni  , our gastric ﬁ  re. Yet one 
of the ﬁ  rst things that occurs in America when you sit down to a meal in a restaurant 
is that the server places a large glass of ice-cold water in front of you. Is there any 
biomedical evidence that drinking ice-cold water inhibits digestion? 
 Ayurveda, along with Western dietitians, also recommends avoiding junk food 
but goes farther by stating that canned and frozen foods and food prepared with 
additives, preservatives, and artiﬁ  cial colors should also be avoided [ 3 ]. In addition, 
several food combinations or practices are proposed by Ayurveda to inhibit diges-
tion and ultimately predispose one toward disease. Some of these combinations and 
practices include eating fruit with other foods, eating equal amounts of ghee and 
honey, heating honey, and eating ﬁ  sh products with milk [ 3 ,  4 ]. Yet can we ﬁ  nd a 
biomedical basis for these Ayurvedic dietary recommendations? 
 One clear example of how modern science supports the ancient concepts of 
Ayurveda is in the use of spices. Spices are essential to the Ayurvedic diet as a way 
to improve digestion, increase strength, enhance the senses, and maintain a healthy 
weight. There is a plethora of biomedical studies examining the physiological prop-
erties of spices, and this topic will therefore not be addressed in the current chapter. 
However, this raises the point that biomedical research has conﬁ  rmed the beneﬁ  cial 
effects of spices on human health and physiology, so perhaps we can ﬁ  nd research 
that will either conﬁ  rm or negate the dietary recommendations of Ayurveda in terms 
of food preparation and food combinations. 
 This is an extremely relevant issue because fewer and fewer of us have the time 
or the resources to prepare home-cooked meals from fresh, organic ingredients for 
every meal. We rely on frozen foods, the microwave, barbecue grilling, and pro-
cessed foods as supplements to our fresh foods in order to create a meal on the go. 
According to Ayurveda, we are increasing our risk for disease by engaging in these 
practices, but can we ﬁ  nd evidence-based research that supports these dietary rec-
ommendations? Most of our food preparation practices such as freezing, microwav-
ing, canning, and processing with chemicals were completely unknown to the 
ancient  vaidyas  . Their recommendations for fresh, wholesome food made sense in 
an ancient world where food spoiled very quickly. But Ayurveda extends these rec-
ommendations into our modern way of preparing and consuming food, and this 
naturally raises the issue of whether our modern food practices are indeed D.I. Lurie
141
detrimental to our health. This chapter will evaluate the evidence-based research 
regarding Ayurvedic dietary recommendations as they relate to practices in modern 
food processing and food consumption.  
11.1.2     Ice-Cold Food and Beverages 
 Let us begin with a scientiﬁ  c evaluation of the simple dictate of Ayurveda that ice- 
cold food and drinks should be avoided because they inhibit digestion. By drinking 
the large glass of ice-water that your server in the U.S. restaurant has placed before 
you, Ayurveda says you are inhibiting your digestion before you have even started 
your meal. Your  jathar agni   will be extinguished, your poorly digested food will 
create  ama , and the accumulation of  ama  will eventually lead to disease. So is there 
any evidence-based research that suggests that cold temperatures inhibit digestion? 
In fact, there are a number of studies that have examined the effect of temperature 
on digestion. 
 One study assessed the effect of temperature on gastric emptying. In this proto-
col, a temperature sensor was introduced through the nose into the stomach in six 
men, and the intragastric temperature was monitored after ingestion of orange juice 
at 4 °C, 37 °C, and 50 °C [ 5 ]. The mean intragastric temperature following ingestion 
of the cold orange juice fell and reached a peak decrease by 45 s after ingestion of 
the juice. Interestingly, the mean intragastric temperature returned to normal within 
30 min of ingestion of the cold orange juice and within 20 min of ingestion of the 
warm orange juice. Thus gastric temperatures recovered more slowly from a cold 
drink than a warm drink. Gastric emptying was then measured following ingestion 
of cold, room-temperature, and warm orange juice. Both the warm and the cold 
juice appeared to empty from the stomach more slowly initially, but the cold juice 
appeared to empty more slowly from the stomach over a 10 min time course com-
pared to the warm or room-temperature juice [ 5 ]. Thus the ingestion of cold juice 
slowed down the initial phase of gastric emptying when the intragastric temperature 
was much lower than body temperature. A later follow-up study demonstrated that 
both cold and warm liquids could suppress gut motility for over 30 min after inges-
tion but that the cold liquid showed greater inhibition [ 6 ]. Thus there is a small body 
of scientiﬁ  c literature supporting the idea    that ingesting cold substances does inhibit 
gastric motility and gastric emptying. It is worth noting that the experiments 
described here used a single ingestion of a cold liquid to produce these short-term 
effects. Drinking ice-cold water throughout a meal would repeatedly inhibit gastric 
emptying and motility and could potentially have a signiﬁ  cant effect on digestion. 
The authors also hypothesized that temperature may have a much larger effect dur-
ing gastric emptying of semisolid or fatty meals because these meals would have a 
higher thermal inertia than the juice [ 5 ]. Therefore, eating a very cold, high-fat 
substance such as ice cream could also have a profound effect on gastric emptying 
and digestion. Ayurveda does not recommend eating cold foods such as ice cream 
regularly and strongly prohibits the drinking of ice-cold beverages with meals. 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
142
 What could be a potential mechanism whereby cold foods and drink inhibit g astric 
motility? Recent studies implicate the transient receptor potential (TRP) cation 
channel TRPA1 that is highly expressed in serotonergic enterochromafﬁ  n (EC) cells 
in the gastrointestinal (GI) system. TRPA1 is activated by pungent compounds and 
cold temperatures, and controls GI motility [ 7 ,  8 ]. EC cells are located on the muco-
sal surface of the GI tract, and the neurotransmitter serotonin is released from these 
cells when TRPA1 is activated. When serotonin is released from EC cells, nerves 
within the GI system are activated, resulting in a number of different physiological 
responses including GI contraction. It is thought that TRPA1 acts as a sensor mol-
ecule for EC cells and may modulate GI function [ 8 ]. Cold is one of the activators 
of the TRPA1 receptor, so cold food and drinks are a signal by which serotonin is 
released by EC cells. 
 Approximately 95 % of all serotonin in the body is located in the GI system, and 
serotonin has multiple effects in the gut due to the many types of serotonin receptors 
that are present in the GI tract [ 9 ]. Because serotonin has so many actions in the gut, 
it is difﬁ  cult to decipher exactly what is going on physiologically when EC cells 
release serotonin. Serotonin has been found to make the bowel contract or relax 
depending on the experiment, and serotonin also controls the peristaltic reﬂ  ex [ 10 ]. 
The release of serotonin by EC cells when TRPA1 receptors are activated has been 
shown to delay gastric emptying [ 11 ], probably through the modulation of the vagus 
nerve that controls gastric reﬂ  exes and ultimately retards gastric emptying [ 9 ]. Thus 
activation of the TRPA1 receptors by cold food or drink could be the mechanism by 
which cold retards gastric emptying and motility (Fig.  11.1 ). This body of work now 
  Fig. 11.1    Schematic illustration of hypothesized effect of a cold drink on GI system. Cold acti-
vates the TRPA1 receptors ( blue triangles  ) located on enterochromafﬁ  n ( EC ) cells. This causes the 
release of serotonin ( red circles  ) from the EC cells, which then activates the vagus nerve and 
inhibits gastric emptying        D.I. Lurie
143
provides a scientiﬁ  c basis to support the basic recommendation of Ayurveda to 
avoid drinking ice-cold beverages with meals and to limit the consumption of cold 
food and drinks.
11.1.3        Carbonated Beverages 
 Naturally bubbling mineral waters have been consumed by humans for thousands of 
years. The ancient Greeks and Romans considered these mineral waters to be ben-
eﬁ cial to health, for both bathing and drinking [ 12 ]. The invention of artiﬁ  cial spar-
kling waters occurred in the mid to late 1700s in England, when Joseph Priestly 
produced the ﬁ  rst sparkling water [ 13 ]. T. Henry in England and J. Schweppe in 
Switzerland then commercially produced bottled carbonated water. Carbonated 
water was included in the US pharmacopoeia until 1830 and was considered to be a 
therapeutic agent [ 14 ]. Carbonated beverages are now found everywhere across the 
globe and are a staple of the modern diet. Carbonated beverages include sparkling 
waters, colas, sodas, beer, and sparkling wine. These beverages have high levels of 
carbonation, can be very acidic, and usually contain large quantities of sugar or 
artiﬁ cial sweeteners [ 13 ]. Carbonation occurs when gaseous CO 2  is dissolved in 
liquid under pressure, and acidity is a common characteristic of many carbonated 
drinks. In an Ayurvedic diet, limiting the consumption of carbonated beverages is 
recommended. And indeed, the effects of carbonated beverages on the GI system 
and the body as a whole has been under investigation in recent years by the biomedi-
cal community. There are differing opinions regarding the effect of carbonation on 
health and the GI system. Some consider carbonated beverages to be beneﬁ  cial to 
the GI system, whereas others believe these beverages to be detrimental [ 12 ]. Before 
we examine the literature pertaining to carbonated beverages, it is important to 
understand a few facts about the biology of carbonation. 
 To begin with, approximately 1 mL (2 mg) of carbon dioxide dissolves in 1 mL 
of a solution at pH 7 (neutral solution). Much of the CO 2  in a carbonated drink is 
lost when the can or bottle is opened (ﬁ  zzing), so much of the CO 2  does not actually 
reach the stomach. In addition, some CO 2  merges with swallowed air to produce 
belching and thus never makes it to the stomach. So only a very small amount of 
CO 2  in a carbonated beverage actually reaches the digestive tract. There is no evi-
dence that the ingested carbonation has a pathological effect on the intestinal tract, 
particularly because the ingested CO 2  is almost completely absorbed by the time it 
reaches the lower GI tract [ 12 ]. Thus carbonation is thought to affect the oral cavity 
and taste, the esophagus, and the stomach, and scientiﬁ  c studies have focused on 
these three components of the GI system. We will concentrate on the effect of car-
bonation on the esophagus and GI system. 
 The main issue regarding carbonation and the esophagus revolves around gas-
troesophageal reﬂ  ux disease (GERD). This is a chronic disease that occurs when 
gastric acid ﬂ  ows back into the esophagus, with the main symptom of the disease 
being heartburn. The medical community recommends treating GERD in part by 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
144
eliminating carbonated beverages from the diet, but it remains controversial as to 
whether carbonated beverages actually exacerbate GERD [ 13 ]. 
 The impact of carbonated beverages in the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) has 
been examined in several studies [ 15 ,  16 ]. The LES is the major sphincter that pro-
tects the esophagus from reﬂ  ux of gastric secretions. Hamoui et al. found that carbon-
ated beverages produced a decrease of LES pressure within the ﬁ  rst 20 min of 
ingestion. They hypothesized that this decrease in LES pressure could be due to gas-
tric distention produced by the carbonation. However, the sample size of this study 
was small. A more recent study evaluated the effect of carbonated beverages on LES 
and on transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations (tLESrs) [ 16 ]. The tLESr is a 
motor pattern that occurs in the absence of a swallow and involves a protracted relax-
ation of the LES, along with the inhibition of the crural diaphragm, and is associated 
with reﬂ  ux events [ 16 ]. The researchers found that not only was there a decrease in 
LES pressure, but tLESr occurred with greater frequency following ingestion of a 
carbonated beverage compared to baseline or water. However, further studies are 
needed to determine whether this increase in tLESr does indeed lead to GERD. 
 In terms of the effect of carbonation on the stomach, ingestion of carbonated 
beverages does result in gastric distention, and early studies indicated that this led 
to a decrease in gastric emptying [ 12 ]. However, a more recent study found that 
sparkling water did not affect total gastric emptying. Instead, the carbonation modi-
ﬁ ed the distribution of both liquids and solids within the stomach such that the 
proximal stomach contained a greater proportion of solids and liquids when taken 
with carbonated water [ 14 ]. In support of this, a second study that assessed ﬂ  uid 
emptying and gastric gas by magnetic resonance imaging found that only cola 
delayed gastric emptying compared to water, a sweetened noncarbonated beverage, 
and a lightly carbonated beverage [ 17 ]. Overall, studies on the effect of carbonated 
beverages on the stomach indicate that these beverages seem to inﬂ  uence the func-
tion of the stomach but that symptoms related to gastric distress only occur when 
carbonated ﬂ  uids are ingested in quantities greater than 300 mL [ 12 ]. 
 While a relationship between carbonated beverages and GERD remains to be 
fully elucidated, it is worth noting that the high sugar content of most carbonated 
beverages can have a very negative impact on health. A recent study found that a 
premeal administration of a noncaloric carbonated beverage had no effect on food 
intake, even though it clearly resulted in gastric distention [ 18 ]. Interestingly, 
increasing the caloric content of a carbonated beverage does not appear to reduce 
the intake of solid food by a corresponding amount (reviewed in Wolf et al. 2007   ). 
In a fascinating study, participants had to consume either 450 kCal day −1  of a soft 
drink or the same amount of energy in jelly beans. They could eat any other food 
they wanted but had to keep a log of their intake. Those who ate the jelly beans 
reduced their total caloric intake by slightly more than the 450 kCal day −1  con-
tained in the jelly beans. In contrast, the soft drink consumers actually increased 
their consumption of other foods and increased their total caloric intake [ 19 ]. It 
appears that the calories contained in ﬂ  uids are not sensed appropriately by the GI 
tract and thus do not activate mechanisms that control appetite and ultimately regu late 
body fat [ 20 ]. Therefore, it is easy to understand how the increased consumption of D.I. Lurie
145
large quantities of sugary carbonated beverages can lead to obesity. In summary, 
carbonated beverages do affect the GI system and may contribute to acid reﬂ  ux, 
although this remains under study. The high sugar content of most carbonated 
drinks may contribute to obesity by apparently bypassing our body’s caloric sen-
sors and caloric compensatory mechanisms in the GI system. People that consume 
a high caloric beverage before or during a meal eat the same number of calories as 
a person drinking a calorie-free beverage with a similar meal [ 20 ]. Ayurveda’s 
recommendation to limit the intake of carbonated beverages is supported on many 
levels by the scientiﬁ  c literature.   
11.2     Food Preparation 
 Now that we have discussed the scientiﬁ  c basis for avoiding cold and carbonated 
beverages, let us turn our attention to food preparation. As you will recall, Ayurveda 
recommends that we eat warm, cooked foods, that we cook without heavy oils 
(such as deep frying), and that we avoid microwaved, frozen, and processed foods. 
But microwaves, freezers, and chemical processing of foods are recent inventions 
and were certainly not present in the ancient world. So are there truly scientiﬁ  c 
reasons for avoiding these types of food preparation, or is Ayurveda simply stuck in 
the past and not keeping pace with the modern world? To begin this discussion, we 
will ﬁ  rst analyze microwave cooking. 
11.2.1     Microwave Cooking 
 Microwave cooking is not recommended by Ayurveda because it is considered to 
damage the life force of food [ 3 ]. But heating and cooking food using a microwave 
is very common in the industrialized world and is fast becoming more widespread 
in the developing world. The convenience and ease of microwave use has made the 
microwave oven a permanent ﬁ  xture in many households and is also becoming 
more prevalent in industrial settings [ 21 ]. Heating by microwave is much faster than 
conventional methods, such as a standard oven, and microwave ovens are also 
cheaper, smaller, and portable. Although faster, microwave ovens heat food using a 
different process than conventional heating. In conventional heating, the surface of 
the food heats ﬁ  rst, and conduction and convection are used to transfer heat from the 
heating source to the surface of the food, and then throughout the product [ 21 ]. Thus 
heat diffuses from the surface of the food, which heats up ﬁ  rst, into the rest of the 
food. Conventional heating is therefore characterized by high surface temperatures 
with colder internal temperatures [ 22 ]. In contrast, microwaves are high-energy 
electromagnetic waves, and microwave heating occurs when electromagnetic ﬁ  eld 
energy is transformed into thermal energy by affecting the polar molecules, such as 
water, in a substance [ 21 ]. Speciﬁ  cally, the electromagnetic waves oscillate and 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
146
cause the polar molecules to rotate following the magnetic ﬁ  elds, and this move-
ment (vibration) of the water or other polar molecules generates heat. Thus, micro-
waves heat food from the inside out, and this heating is nonuniform. In addition, 
microwave heating is unable to achieve high enough temperatures on the surface of 
the food to create a crisp crust [ 22 ]. 
 The nonuniform temperature distribution is one of the chief problems of using a 
microwave to heat or cook food. For example, temperature differences in mashed 
potatoes in a ready-to-eat meal show a temperature difference of more than 70 °C 
between the hottest and coldest spot after 30 s of heating in the microwave [ 23 ]. The 
large temperature differential following microwave cooking raises the concern that 
microbes in food may not be completely killed because of the uneven temperature 
distribution. This becomes particularly concerning in meat products where bacteria 
that survive the cooking process could result in serious health problems [ 21 ]. So 
large variations in temperature within food is one reason to be careful when using 
the microwave to cook. 
 But do microwaves alter the basic chemical structure of the food itself? The con-
sensus in the scientiﬁ  c community is that in general, it does not. Estimates have 
shown that the number of microwave photons generated by microwave ovens are 
“orders of magnitude too small to establish multiphoton dissociation or ionization” 
that would be required to create chemical radicals that would result in changes in the 
basic chemistry of the food [ 24 ]. However, microwaves can alter the texture of food, 
particularly baked goods that toughen following microwaving. Starch in food seems 
to be the source of this textural change when the starch content of the food product 
is above 37 %. What actually seems to be causing the toughening of baked goods by 
the microwave is the boiling that occurs during the microwave process. The nonuni-
form heat generated by microwaves eventually results in localized spots that are 
superheated, and this creates a localized area of boiling. When this boiling occurs 
within starch, two things occur. The ﬁ  rst is that there is an increase in the solubility 
of the starch, and amylose begins to leach out. The second is that this amylose solu-
tion is redistributed within the food product. When the product cools, the amylose 
solidiﬁ  es into a crystalline form, resulting in toughening. If baked products are 
heated below the boiling point, then toughening does not occur [ 22 ]. So in this case, 
microwaves do not necessarily alter the basic chemistry of bread, for example, but 
they do change the solubility and distribution of starch within the product, resulting 
in an unpleasant textural change. 
 In addition to the household use of microwave cooking, microwave technology 
is being increasingly utilized for drying in the food industry. Microwave treatment 
is also being considered as a good method for eliminating pests and mildew in food. 
But few studies have examined the effect of microwaves when they are used to dry 
food products such as rice. An interesting study recently examined the effect of 
microwaves on the quality of rice during storage [ 25 ]. Raw rice was microwave- 
treated as it traveled on a transport belt and then was either vacuum packed or atmo-
sphere packed. The rice was then stored for up to 180 days and analyzed for water 
content and other biochemical parameters, protein content, and the sensory quality 
of the rice when it was cooked after storage. The analysis of the rice was performed D.I. Lurie
147
at 0, 30, 60, 120, 150, and 180 days of storage. These researchers found that micro-
wave treatment reduced the free fatty acid and protein content of the rice, but the 
BV ratio increased. The BV is deﬁ  ned as the ratio of the amylose to amylopectin 
content, and higher BV numbers signify a higher amylose content. The authors 
hypothesize that the higher BV content is the result of the dispersion of the amylose 
and amylopectin caused by the microwaves. Interestingly, the sensory quality of the 
cooked rice improved with microwave treatment, perhaps due to the better adhe-
siveness of the rice resulting from an apparent increase in amylose [ 25 ]. In addition, 
free fatty acids tend to increase during the storage of rice, but these changes were 
smaller following microwave treatment. Microwave-treated rice was also lower in 
protein and sugar content compared to untreated rice at the beginning of the study, 
but there was no difference observed by the end of the study. Fat content was higher 
in the treated rice at the beginning of the study, but there was no difference by the 
end of the study. (On a side note, the amylose content and fat content of rice increase 
over time, while the protein and sugar contents decrease with time. Thus, the bio-
chemistry of rice does change with age. This provides a scientiﬁ  c underpinning for 
the Ayurvedic recommendation to eat rice that has been aged by 1 year [ 26 ]). 
 This group also used near-infrared reﬂ  ectance spectroscopy (NIRS) to examine 
the chemical identity of the rice. They found a change in molecular conformation in 
the treated rice compared to the control rice that could not be detected by chemical 
methods but did recover somewhat over time. Thus microwaves did induce some 
molecular changes in the rice that appeared to recover over time. But the result of 
this was a better taste experience when the microwaved rice was cooked compared 
to the nonmicrowaved rice.  
 The scientiﬁ  c ﬁ ndings indicate that the major issues with microwave cooking are 
uneven heating with areas of very high boiling temperatures within food. Foods 
containing starches are prone to toughening in a microwave oven, and microwaving 
raw foods, such as rice, can lead to changes in molecular structure that partially 
recover over time. The scientiﬁ  c community would therefore say the effect of 
microwaves on food is fairly minimal. However, there are some structural changes 
that appear to occur following microwave treatment. How this relates to the life 
force or  prana   is impossible to evaluate from a scientiﬁ  c perspective because we do 
not have a way to measure or deﬁ  ne  prana   using Western science.  
11.2.2     Inﬂ  uence of Cooking Methods on Vegetables 
 So now let us examine how different cooking methods, including microwave cook-
ing, can affect the nutritional content of vegetables. This is an important issue 
because fruits and vegetables are considered to be the major source of reactive oxy-
gen species (ROS)-scavenging antioxidants in our diet [ 27 ]. Most of these antioxi-
dants are thought to react with or scavenge free radicals and chelate catalytic metals, 
resulting in decreases in lipid peroxidation [ 28 ]. Lipid peroxidation is the oxidative 
degradation of lipids, such as the lipids in cellular membranes. This results in 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
148
cellular damage and is associated with aging and a number of degenerative disease 
processes. Because of their antioxidant properties, fruits and vegetables are consid-
ered to be functional foods that help to ameliorate diseases such as cancer and car-
diovascular diseases [ 27 – 30 ]. There is a large body of literature demonstrating that 
a diet rich in fruits and vegetables contributes to good health, but we tend to eat fruit 
raw rather than cooked. In contrast, we usually cook vegetables before they are 
eaten, so how does cooking alter the phytochemical components of vegetables? 
Ayurveda suggests that we should mostly consume vegetables that have been lightly 
cooked. Can we ﬁ  nd a scientiﬁ  c basis for this, and is there a preferable method for 
cooking vegetables that retains or enhances their health-promoting qualities? 
 Vegetables contain antioxidants such as ﬂ  avonoids, vitamins such as vitamin C 
(ascorbic acid), carotenoids, and polyphenols [ 27 ,  29 ,  30 ]. Glucosinolates are found 
in  Brassica   vegetables such as broccoli and are thought to contribute to the antican-
cer properties of these vegetables [ 31 ]. Glucosinolates are a large class of sulfur- 
and nitrogen-containing secondary metabolites of most plants and are particularly 
abundant in  Brassica   vegetables. They are rapidly metabolized to isothiocyanates 
when they come into contact with the enzyme myrosinase, which is stored in a dif-
ferent compartment of the plant than glucosinolates. When plant tissues are dam-
aged by chopping or cooking, for example, glucosinolates come into contact with 
myrosinase, and isothiocyanates are produced. These compounds are thought to 
have a protective effect against cancers, especially colon, lung, and bladder cancers 
[ 31 ,  32 ]. A number of studies have examined in detail the effect of cooking methods 
on these phytochemicals, but the literature is rather confusing and incomplete, and 
it is quite difﬁ  cult to make comparisons among studies. However, a few themes do 
emerge from this work. 
 Turkmen et al. examined the effects of boiling, microwave cooking, and steam-
ing on spinach, squash, leeks, peppers, peas, and green beans. They evaluated the 
total phenolic content and total antioxidant content of the vegetables after each type 
of cooking. They reported that cooking did not negatively affect total antioxidant 
activity or total phenolic content, except for some small losses of phenolics in leeks, 
squash, and peas [ 30 ]. Indeed, they found that moderate heat treatment actually 
improved the antioxidant activity of peppers, broccoli, and spinach, and it did not 
matter which cooking method was used. A similar study looked at the effect of boil-
ing, microwave cooking, and frying (2 tablespoons oil in a frying pan) on phenolics 
and total antioxidant activity of spinach, cabbage, carrots, yellow turnip, white tur-
nip, and cauliﬂ  ower [ 28 ]. This group found that the total phenolic content was 
reduced the most with microwaving, but boiling and frying also reduced phenolic 
content. The researchers concluded that boiling and frying vegetables were prefer-
able to microwaving them [ 28 ]. However, it should be noted that Turkmen et al. 
microwaved the vegetables for longer times (5 min) than the Sultana group 
(1–1.5 min). Another group examined the antioxidant activity (as related to the 
inhibition of lipid peroxidation) of a variety of vegetables following different cook-
ing methods [ 27 ]. Boiling produced the greatest decrease in antioxidant activity in 
most of the vegetables, but baking and microwaving were the two methods that 
retained the most antioxidant activity in many of the vegetables. For some D.I. Lurie
149
vegetables, antioxidant activity was actually increased following these cooking 
methods [ 27 ]. In this study, microwaving times varied between 2 and 4.5 s depend-
ing on the vegetable. Baking times varied between 14 and 49 min, and frying times 
varied between 6 and 17 min. The researchers found that beetroot, garlic, and green 
beans retained their antioxidant activity after most cooking treatments. Swiss chard 
and peppers lost most of their activity in all of the cooking processes. They con-
cluded that, depending on the vegetable, microwaving and grilling on a griddle pro-
duced the lowest loss of antioxidant activity, frying was intermediate, and pressure 
cooking and boiling resulted in the greatest losses [ 27 ]. 
 Interestingly, deep frying carrots, broccoli, and courgettes (summer squash) 
resulted in a loss of carotenoid, ﬂ  avonoids, and ascorbic acid and a large decrease in 
phenolics [ 29 ]. Avoiding deep-fried foods is part of following an Ayurvedic diet 
regime. This group also demonstrated that glucosinolates were completely pre-
served by steaming only, and that steaming actually increased their concentration by 
30 %. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that there is a preferential cooking 
method for individual vegetables, but in general, deep frying and boiling should be 
avoided. 
 Much attention has focused on  Brassica   vegetables, particularly broccoli, 
because of its clearly demonstrated antioxidant properties. As mentioned earlier, 
glucosinolates are an important phytochemical found in  Brassica   vegetables. Other 
important components include vitamins, minerals, and other antioxidants. 
Considerable attention has been paid to how cooking methods and freezing affect 
this class of vegetables. But again, the data are contradictory. Microwaving induces 
the loss of vitamin C in broccoli, and it was hypthosized that the smaller losses in 
phenolics, glucosinolates, and minerals was mostly due to leaching into the cooking 
water [ 33 ]. Glucosinolates are also modulated by the type of oil that broccoli is stir- 
fried in. Reﬁ  ned olive oil and sunﬂ  ower oil signiﬁ  cantly reduce glucosinolates, 
whereas extra virgin olive, soybean, safﬂ  ower, and peanut oils do not signiﬁ  cantly 
affect glucosinolate content [ 34 ]. Freezing also affects the phytochemical content of 
broccoli and other vegetables. In general, freezing vegetables and then cooking 
them results in very large losses of antioxidants. For example, fresh  Brassica   vege-
tables retain phytochemicals and total antioxidants better than frozen vegetables 
[ 35 ,  36 ]. Frozen vegetables are often blanched before freezing, and this leads to a 
disruption of the cell membrane and a leaching out of phytochemicals before the 
cooking process [ 35 ]. Thus it is not the freezing itself but the blanching process that 
decreases the nutritional value of vegetables. However, let us examine the process 
of freezing in more detail because the Ayurvedic diet stresses fresh foods, and the 
eating of frozen foods is discouraged.  
11.2.3     Freezing 
 Frozen foods have been a part of world culture since ancient times. Ice cellars were 
used to preserve food in ancient China, and the Greeks and Romans stored their 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
150
food in cold cellars ﬁ  lled with ice. Flavored ices and ice creams have been con-
sumed since the 1500s, and frozen ﬁ  sh and meats was a thriving industry by the late 
1800s [ 37 ]. The majority of frozen foods are quick frozen. This entails a freezing 
process that rapidly freezes the food product such that it passes through the zone of 
maximum crystallization as rapidly as possible [ 37 ]. As discussed previously, many 
foods go through some type of processing, such as blanching, before they are fro-
zen. Blanching is used to inactivate enzymes that might lead to the deterioration of 
the food product over time [ 37 ]. Blanching is usually performed for a few seconds 
to minutes, in water below the boiling point [ 38 ]. As we have seen, blanching before 
freezing affects the antioxidant content of vegetables, and it appears to have an 
effect on other phytochemicals. 
 Freezing and storage also appear to decrease the folate content of vegetables. 
Folate (B vitamins) prevents neural tube defects and has also been shown to reduce 
the risk of other diseases, including cardiovascular diseases and colon cancer [ 38 ]. 
Folates are very unstable compounds that are highly sensitive to pH, high tempera-
tures, storage time, and food processing. Indeed, folates are degraded by simply 
washing vegetables in water. Czarnowska and Gujska    [ 38 ] examined the effect of 
freezing and storage on six vegetables – green and yellow beans, peas, cauliﬂ  ower, 
broccoli, and spinach. They found that not only did blanching reduce folate levels 
but frozen vegetables stored over time lost additional folate. Cauliﬂ  ower lost a sig-
niﬁ cant amount of folate by 3 months of storage, while the remaining vegetables 
lost over 90 % of their folate between 6 and 12 months. 
 While freezing is generally considered to be a safe method for preserving foods, 
some microorganisms may not be completely destroyed by freezing. Bacterial 
spores such as botulinum toxin appears to survive freezing and freeze-thaw cycles. 
Protozoa such as  Cyclospora   also appear to survive freezing, and gram-positive bac-
teria are less affected by freezing than gram-negative bacteria. Salmonella are well 
known to survive the freezing process, and  campylobacter   has been found in frozen 
chicken (reviewed in Archer [ 37 ]). It is very clear that freezing does not eliminate all 
foodborne pathogens and that one of the risks inherent in frozen foods is the poten-
tial for contamination by microorganisms that survive the freezing process. 
 Many of these microorganisms are found in meat, so that is an obvious risk factor 
in freezing meat products. But does freezing alter other components of meat? 
Freezing, and the resulting thawing before cooking, mainly affects the water com-
ponent of meat. Water is found within and between muscle ﬁ  bers. As the water 
within meat freezes, there is a concomitant increase in the remaining proteins, min-
erals, vitamins, lipids, and carbohydrates. This results in changes in the muscle 
ﬁ bers themselves, and this modiﬁ  es the characteristics of the muscle cell membrane 
and affects the meat quality [ 39 ]. Denaturation of the meat proteins occurs, and 
myosin has been reported to be the protein altered the most by freezing [ 40 ]. 
However, other studies suggest that there is not a major effect on protein denatur-
ation with freezing, and clearly more research is needed [ 39 ]. Signiﬁ  cantly, bio-
chemical reactions have been shown to still take place in meat that is stored at 
temperatures higher than 20 °C. This is because at these temperatures, there remains 
sufﬁ cient unfrozen water in the meat for various chemical reactions to occur, D.I. Lurie
151
including oxidation of lipids and proteins, particularly when the meat is thawed. 
This in turn leads to the production of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances 
(TBARS), which can produce rancid meat. TBARS can be measured and are signiﬁ  -
cantly higher in meat that has been stored for 90 days at 20 °C than in fresh meat 
(reviewed in Leygonie et al. [ 39 ]). Protein oxidation can produce free radicals, and, 
as we have discussed, these can be detrimental to human health.  
11.2.4     Preparation of Meat 
 Ayurveda recommends a diet rich in plant products with very limited consumption 
of meat, especially red meat. A diet high in red meat is associated with increased 
risk for cardiovascular disease and cancer. Indeed, the American Cancer Society 
(ACS) in its most recent 2012 guidelines suggests a “healthy diet, with an emphasis 
on plant foods.” If red meat is consumed, then it should be lean meat and served in 
small portions. In addition, the preparation of meats such as red meat, poultry, and 
ﬁ sh should be by broiling, baking, or poaching rather than charbroiling or frying 
[ 41 ]. According to the ACS, there is a 15–20 % risk of developing colon and rectal 
cancer for every 1,000 g of red meat or 50 g of processed meat eaten each day. 
Studies have shown an association between preferential consumption of heavily 
browned meat surfaces and colorectal cancer [ 42 ] as well as a potential association 
between increased consumption of grilled meats and prostate cancer [ 43 ]. 
 Components of meat include heterocyclic amines and polycylic aromatic 
hydrodocarbons (PAHs), and these are considered carcinogens and mutagens. These 
substances are produced when meat is cooked at high temperatures (grilled or bar-
becued over an open ﬂ  ame) with charring of the meat surface [ 41 ,  44 ,  45 ]. 
Heterocyclic amines have been found in the urine of healthy volunteers eating a 
normal diet. But it should be noted that the average actual human daily intake of 
these amines is probably too low for cancer production by heterocyclic amines 
alone. However, animal studies suggest that giving other known carcinogens con-
currently with heterocyclic amines can lead to additive or synergistic carcinogenic 
effects (reviewed in Sugimura et al. [ 45 ]). An example of this is that a high fat diet 
can enhance colon carcinogenesis when a relatively small dose of the heterocyclic 
amine PhIP is given to rats [ 46 ]. Therefore, it is recommended that meat not be 
cooked for long periods of time or cooked over an open ﬂ  ame. Interestingly, hetero-
cyclic amine levels can be lowered in fried ground meat patties by reducing the 
temperature and ﬂ  ipping the hamburger every minute. The patties also reach an 
internal temperature of 70 °C faster using this cooking method [ 47 ]. 
 Carcinogenic PAHs are found in tobacco smoke and are also generated in food 
through grilling and smoking. Food cooked over an open ﬂ  ame has some of the high-
est levels of PAHs, and marinating meats might inﬂ  uence their levels of PAHs [ 44 ]. 
Taken together, these studies indicate that a diet that overemphasizes charbroiled and 
grilled red meat in particular is a risk factor for cancer, thus supporting the Ayurvedic 
diet that emphasizes plant-based foods.   11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
152
11.3     Processed Foods 
 The modern Ayurvedic diet also avoids processed foods. There is a large body of 
literature summarizing the negative effects of processed foods on human health, 
but here we will discuss just a couple of aspects of this issue. The deleterious 
effects of processed foods fall into several categories. The ﬁ  rst is the harmful 
effects of the processing chemicals on cellular physiology and function. The sec-
ond is the way in which the nutrient content of food is changed in order to preserve 
it. A good example of this, as discussed previously, is the blanching of vegetables 
before freezing and how it changes the phytochemistry of plants. A third aspect of 
processed food that is deleterious to health is the rapid proliferation, low cost, and 
availability of fast foods that are high in fat and sugars and contribute to poor health 
outcomes. 
11.3.1     Phosphates 
 Let us take an example of a chemical commonly used in food processing, phos-
phate additives. Phosphate is a natural component of many foods, including starch-
rich foods such as breads and other food classes such as meats. This type of 
phosphate is organically bound, and approximately half of it is absorbed in the GI 
system. The phosphates that are used as food additives or preservatives are not 
organically bound and are therefore absorbed much more efﬁ  ciently by the GI 
system. Foods that have artiﬁ  cial phosphates include colas and soft drinks, canned 
ﬁ sh, baked items, and processed meats such as ham and sausages (reviewed in Ritz 
et al. [ 48 ]). Currently, phosphates in food do not have to be listed on food or bever-
age labels, and these foods and drinks can add as much as 1 g of phosphate per day 
to our diet [ 49 ]. 
 Phosphates can damage the cardiovascular system and negatively effect renal 
function, even in healthy people. Individuals with chronic renal failure are usually 
on a phosphate-restricted diet because high hyperphosphatemia is associated with 
increased morbidity in these patients. Phosphates are used as preservatives in a 
wide array of food products, including meats and powdered products such as milks, 
puddings, and coffee, and they are a component of soft cheeses. Flavored carbon-
ated drinks and colas contain large quantities of phosphates as well. They are ubiq-
uitous in fast foods and ready-to-eat meals. It is clear that phosphate additives are a 
cause for concern [ 48 ]. Phosphate homeostasis is regulated by the peptide hormone 
FGF23, and this hormone modulates mineral metabolism by acting on the kidney 
and parathyroid gland [ 49 ]. Dysregulation of this system can result in vascular 
calciﬁ  cation, metabolic bone disease, cardiomyopathy, and kidney disease [ 49 ]. 
This is just one example of the potentially harmful compounds that are added to 
fast foods and processed foods.  D.I. Lurie
153
11.3.2     Reﬁ  ning of Foods 
 As we discussed earlier, food processing can also affect the nutritional components 
of foods. In addition to vegetables, grains are also impacted by processing. The 
antioxidant phytochemicals in wheat, barley, and beans are mostly located in the 
outermost layers, and these layers are removed during the milling and reﬁ  ning pro-
cess to make ﬂ  ours and bran. Similarly, the hulls of nuts such as hazelnuts and 
almonds are also rich in antioxidant compounds. These hulls are also often removed 
during their processing [ 50 ]. These are examples of how processing can negatively 
affect the nutritional content of foods, although this is not through the addition of 
manufactured chemicals. It is important to point out that some treatments actually 
increase the phytochemical content of foods. For example, the processing of toma-
toes to produce ketchups and pastes results in the release and increased absorption 
of the antioxidant lycopene [ 51 ]. Handling, chopping, and milling of food can 
impact its phytochemistry properties, but much of this is unavoidable and not all of 
it has a negative impact on human health.  
11.3.3     Ultra-processed foods 
 Finally, ultra-processed foods, such as cakes and pastries, breakfast cereals, pizza, 
hamburgers, and ready-to-eat meals, are high-calorie foods that contain a lot of fat 
and sugars. This is very detrimental to human health. In the United States alone, 
regular soft drinks, cakes and pastries, hamburgers, pizza, and potato chips/popcorn 
are the top ﬁ  ve foods that contribute to energy intake in the population. The top ten 
food groups (including beer, cheese, and french fries) contribute almost 75 % of 
energy intake, and this was in 2000 [ 52 ]. It is hard to imagine that this number has 
not increased over the last decade. What is very concerning is that at least one quar-
ter of all energy intake comes from foods that have large quantities of sugar and fat 
and few micronutrients. This trend is increasing worldwide and is particularly 
obvious in studies that classify foods based on the amount of industrial processing. 
A Brazilian study classiﬁ  ed foods into three groups: (1) unprocessed or minimally 
processed, (2) processed ingredients, and (3) ultra-processed [ 53 ]. Minimally pro-
cessed foods include fresh and frozen fruits and vegetables, frozen meats, and fresh 
and pasteurized meats. Processed ingredients included vegetable oils, butter, milk, 
cream, and sugar. Ultra-processed foods include breads, cakes and pastries, candies, 
breakfast cereals, frozen dinners, and pickled and smoked meats. An analysis of 
food purchases based on these three classiﬁ  cations revealed that consumption of 
Group 1 and 2 foods has been steadily declining and replaced by the consumption 
of Group 3 foods [ 53 ]. Group 3 foods now represent more than one quarter of the 
total energy that was purchased in Brazilian households. This is a worldwide trend 
and contributes to the rising incidence of obesity and other diseases. Consumption 
of reﬁ  ned sugar is also on the rise, with worldwide consumption tripling over the 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
154
last 50 years. Most people are consuming on average more than 500 cal per day 
from added sugar [ 54 ]. Sugar induces a wide range of diseases associated with 
metabolic syndrome, and some consider that “sugar also has the clear potential for 
abuse” [ 54 ]. 
 It is important to point out that fast foods and low-nutrition foods are also a social 
issue. People eat these types of foods when there is easy access and low cost. For 
example, in the United States, McDonald’s ensures that there is a restaurant within 
a 3–4 min car ride for the average American [ 55 ]. In addition, in the United States 
there are 1.6 times more fast-food restaurants that are located within predominately 
low-income and black neighborhoods as compared to predominately white neigh-
borhoods [ 55 ]. The situation is reversed in India, where fast food is more readily 
available to the afﬂ  uent compared to the rural poor [ 56 ]. 
 Thus, it is very clear that processed foods contribute to the global burden of obe-
sity and disease, and there is a great deal of scientiﬁ  c evidence to support this. We are 
becoming increasingly aware of the negative health issues associated with processed 
foods, and Ayurveda supports a diet that does not contain these types of foods.  
11.3.4     Honey and Ghee 
 We will end our examination of the scientiﬁ  c studies that support many of the 
Ayurvedic diet recommendations by discussing honey and ghee. Honey and ghee 
are two food items that are used extensively in the Indian diet; ghee was produced 
in ancient India as early as 1500 BC [ 57 ,  58 ]. Ghee is the Indian name for clariﬁ  ed 
butter that is usually prepared from cow’s milk. But many other countries produce 
ghee or gheelike products, including Iran, Egypt, Ethiopa, Sudan, and Uganda [ 58 ]. 
Ghee is used for cooking but also has medicinal qualities, and many herbal prepara-
tions in Ayurveda are formulated in ghee. In Ayurveda, heated honey and honey 
mixed in equal parts with ghee are considered to be detrimental to health [ 3 ,  57 ]. 
But are there any scientiﬁ  c studies that support these ancient ideas? 
 Throughout the world, honey is considered both a medicine and a food. Honey 
contains a number of different constituents, including glucose, fructose, water, pro-
teins, organic acids, vitamins, minerals, and antioxidant ﬂ  avonoids [ 59 ,  60 ]. Many of 
the substances that give honey its distinct aroma, ﬂ  avor, and biological activity are 
sensitive to heat [ 61 ]. Heat and thermal processing are used to eliminate microorgan-
isms and reduce the moisture content of honey so that it does not ferment and spoil 
and to modify its tendency to crystallize [ 60 ,  61 ]. Thus there is quite a large body of 
literature examining the effects of heat on honey. Heating honey results in a decrease 
in thermosensitive aromatic substances, and in general these losses are proportional 
to the temperature and heating time. In contrast, heating honey at fairly low tempera-
tures (50–70 °C) for up to 12 days actually increases the antioxidant activity of 
honey [ 60 ]. This is thought to occur because there is an increase in the formation of 
brown pigment through the Maillard reaction. When honey and other substances 
containing sugar are heated, sugars condense to form amino acids, and this leads D.I. Lurie
155
to the formation of brown pigment. This reaction is called the Maillard reaction, 
and Maillard reaction products are thought to have antioxidant properties [ 60 ]. 
Thus, heating honey at low temperatures induces the Maillard reaction and the for-
mation of brown pigment showing antioxidant activity. 
 However, when honey is heated at high temperatures, e.g., when cooking, then 
many of the substances in honey break down. Heating can produce a decrease in 
diastase activity. Diastase is an enzyme that naturally occurs in honey, and diastase 
hyrodrolyzes starch. The Honey Quality and International Regulatory Standards 
have set the standard that diastase in honey must not be ≤8. Heating at high tem-
peratures reduces this activity below this standard [ 61 ,  62 ]. Heating has also been 
shown to increase the hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) content. HMF is a cyclic alde-
hyde that is formed by fructose and glucose dehydration under acidic conditions 
[ 61 ]. HMF is a major freshness and quality factor for honey; fresh honey contains 
very little HMF. HMF levels rise with heating, are a measure of overheated honey, 
and are associated with the browning of honey    [ 57 ,  60 ,  61 ]. Both diastase and HMF 
affect the quality of honey, but neither is associated with a disease process. Honey 
has also been shown to contain metabolites of nitric oxide (NO). NO is an important 
cellular signaling molecule and plays a positive role in many biological processes 
and systems, including the immune and nervous systems. Honey contains several 
metabolites of NO, and this may play a role in its medicinal properties. Heating and 
lengthy storage times decrease levels of NO metabolites in honey [ 63 ]. Therefore, 
heating honey could negatively impact its medicinal properties. 
 To date, only one scientiﬁ  c study has examined the properties of honey mixed 
with ghee. It was found that heated honey mixed with ghee in unequal amounts 
resulted in enhanced browning and increased antioxidant activity compared with 
heated honey alone [ 57 ]. The researchers then administered (1) unheated honey, (2) 
heated honey, (3) honey and ghee, or (4) heated honey and ghee to rats for 7 weeks 
and found no changes in food consumption or organ weight [ 57 ]. A major limitation 
of this study for our purposes was that the honey and ghee were not mixed in equal 
proportions. It would be very interesting to determine how the properties of the 
honey/ghee mixture might change when mixed together equally. 
 The scientiﬁ  c evidence does demonstrate that antioxidants in honey do increase 
with low levels of heating, and NO decreases with heating. But it is not known how 
this might impact health, and no studies to date have examined phytochemical 
changes in a mixture of equal parts honey and ghee. Thus there is currently no scien-
tiﬁ c explanation for Ayurveda’s prohibition on mixing equal parts honey and ghee.   
11.4     Conclusions 
 This chapter examined some of the common dietary guidelines given by Ayurveda 
to determine whether we could ﬁ  nd evidence-based biomedical research to support 
these basic principles. And in fact we could. Science supports many of these con-
cepts, ranging from the avoidance of ice-cold beverages and food, to avoiding 11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
156
cooking by boiling and extensive grilling, to eliminating processed food from our 
diets (summarized in Fig.  11.2 ). Where science fails us is when we try to overlay 
our scientiﬁ  c principles with the concepts that are unique to Ayurveda. A good 
example of this is microwaving food. We have seen that microwaves can alter cer-
tain aspects of the structure of food and change the quality of our experience with 
it, e.g., the toughening of baked products following heating by microwaves. 
Microwaving can also lower the antioxidant activity of some vegetables, but there is 
no strong scientiﬁ  c link between the effects of microwaving and a detrimental effect 
on human health. In Ayurveda, microwaving decreases the  prana   or life force of 
food. But we have no way of measuring or even scientiﬁ  cally identifying  prana  . 
  Fig. 11.2    Summary of scientiﬁ  c evidence for Ayurvedic dietary guidelines and recommendations        D.I. Lurie
157
This does not mean that  prana   does not exist, just that modern science has no way 
to identify or measure it. We are therefore unable to design an evidence-based study 
to test the effect of microwaves on  prana.   Thus, science must remain silent for the 
time being regarding the idea that microwaves reduce  prana   in food.
   For Ayurveda to be fully accepted by the Western biomedical community, it is 
crucial that we document and support Ayurvedic concepts and principles with 
evidence- based science. That being said, we are making slow progress (as discussed 
in this chapter), and new information from the biomedical community is emerging 
daily that is applicable to Ayurvedic principles. An excellent example is a fascinat-
ing new study demonstrating that gut bacteria metabolize L-carnitine in meat to 
trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO). The production of TMAO modulates cholesterol 
metabolism, leading to increased atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease [ 64 ]. 
In addition, people who ate a lot of meat produced more TMAO from L-carnitine 
than did vegans or vegetarians who ingested L-carnitine. This was due to different 
populations of gut bacteria in meat eaters versus vegetarians [ 64 ]. This study pro vides 
a novel cellular pathway by which the consumption of red meat leads to cardiovas-
cular disease through the transformation of L-carnitine by gut bacteria. Not only 
does this support the Ayurvedic principle that red meat should be mostly avoided in 
the diet, but it also provides irrefutable scientiﬁ  c evidence that gut bacteria and diet 
are inextricably linked and modulate human health. Indeed, a new body of literature 
has emerged over the last several years that highlights the role of gut bacteria in 
determining health outcomes. In Ayurveda, a healthy GI system with good digestion 
and elimination is essential to good health. It is remarkable that thousands of years 
later, modern medical science is reaching the same conclusion! It will be very excit-
ing to watch this new area of biomedicine develop, and Ayurveda will certainly 
beneﬁ  t from these studies. The acceptance by the medical and scientiﬁ  c communi-
ties that gut bacteria can signiﬁ  cantly contribute to human health will most certainly 
help Ayurveda gain a foothold in modern medical practices. These and other studies 
serve to validate the principles and practices of Ayurveda within a twenty-ﬁ  rst- 
century framework of health and disease.     
   References 
     1.   Guha A (2006) Ayurvedic concept of food and nutrition. SoM articles paper 25  
     2.    Zisman S, Goldberg DL, Veniegaas M (2003) Nutritional theory in Ayurveda. Altern 
Complement Ther 9:191–197. doi:  10.1089/107628003322256904      
        3.   Tirtha S (2007) In: Uniyal DRC (ed) The Ayurveda encyclopedia: natural secrets to healing, 
prevention and longevity. Ayurveda Holistic Center Press, Bayville, pp 127–129  
    4.    Pole S (2008) The Ayurvedic approach to digestive health and nutrition. Nutrition 2:1–9  
      5.    Sun WM, Houghton LA, Read NW, Grundy DG, Johnson AG (1988) Effect of meal tempera-
ture on gastric emptying of liquids in man. Gut 29:302–305  
    6.    Sun WM, Penagini R, Hebbard G, Malbert C, Jones KL, Emery S, Dent J, Horowitz M (1995) 
Effect of drink temperature on antropyloroduodenal motility and gastric electrical activity in 
humans. Gut 37:329–334  11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
158
    7.    Hale MW, Raison CL, Lowry CA (2013) Integrative physiology of depression and antidepres sant 
drug action: implications for serotonergic mechanisms of action and novel therapeutic strate-
gies for treatment of depression. Pharmacol Ther 137:108–118. doi:  10.1016/j.pharmthera.
2012.09.005      
     8.    Nozawa K, Kawabata-Shoda E, Doihara H, Kojima R, Okada H, Mochizuki S, Sano Y , 
Inamura K, Matsushime H, Koizumi T, Yokoyama T, Ito H (2009) TRPA1 regulates gastroin-
testinal motility through serotonin release from enterochromafﬁ  n cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 106:3408–3413. doi:  10.1073/pnas.0805323106      
     9.    Gershon MD (2012) Serotonin is a sword and a shield of the bowel: serotonin plays offense 
and defense. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc 123:268–280, discussion 280  
    10.    Sikander A, Rana SV , Prasad KK (2009) Role of serotonin in gastrointestinal motility and 
irritable bowel syndrome. Clin Chim Acta 403:47–55. doi:  10.1016/j.cca.2009.01.028      
    11.    Doihara H, Nozawa K, Kawabata-Shoda E, Kojima R, Yokoyama T, Ito H (2009) TRPA1 
agonists delay gastric emptying in rats through serotonergic pathways. Naunyn Schmiedebergs 
Arch Pharmacol 380:353–357. doi:  10.1007/s00210-009-0435-7      
        12.    Cuomo R, Sarnelli G, Savarese MF, Buyckx M (2009) Carbonated beverages and gastrointes-
tinal system: between myth and reality. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 19:683–689. doi:  10.1016/j.
numecd.2009.03.020      
      13.    Johnson T, Gerson L, Hershcovici T, Stave C, Fass R (2010) Systematic review: the effects of 
carbonated beverages on gastro-oesophageal reﬂ  ux disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 31:607–
614. doi:  10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04232.x      
     14.    Pouderoux P, Friedman N, Shirazi P, Ringelstein JG, Keshavarzian A (1997) Effect of carbon-
ated water on gastric emptying and intragastric meal distribution. Dig Dis Sci 42:34–39  
    15.    Hamoui N, Lord RV , Hagen JA, Theisen J, Demeester TR, Crookes PF (2006) Response of the 
lower esophageal sphincter to gastric distention by carbonated beverages. J Gastrointest Surg 
10:870–877. doi:  10.1016/j.gassur.2005.11.010      
      16.    Shukla A, Meshram M, Gopan A, Ganjewar V , Kumar P, Bhatia SJ (2012) Ingestion of a car-
bonated beverage decreases lower esophageal sphincter pressure and increases frequency of 
transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation in normal subjects. Indian J Gastroenterol 
31:121–124. doi:  10.1007/s12664-012-0206-0      
    17.    Ploutz-Snyder L, Foley J, Ploutz-Snyder R, Kanaley J, Sagendorf K, Meyer R (1999) Gastric 
gas and ﬂ  uid emptying assessed by magnetic resonance imaging. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup 
Physiol 79:212–220  
    18.    Cuomo R, Savarese MF, Sarnelli G, Nicolai E, Aragri A, Cirillo C, V ozzella L, Zito FP, 
Verlezza V , Efﬁ  cie E, Buyckx M (2011) The role of a pre-load beverage on gastric volume and 
food intake: comparison between non-caloric carbonated and non-carbonated beverage. Nutr J 
10:114. doi:  10.1186/1475-2891-10-114      
    19.    DiMeglio DP, Mattes RD (2000) Liquid versus solid carbohydrate: effects on food intake and 
body weight. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 24:794–800  
     20.    Wolf A, Bray GA, Popkin BM (2008) A short history of beverages and how our body treats 
them. Obes Rev 9:151–164. doi:  10.1111/j.1467-789X.2007.00389.x      
       21.    Vadivambal R, Jayas DS (2010) Non-uniform temperature distribution during microwave heat-
ing of food materials-A review. Food Bioprocess Technol 3:161–171  
      22.    Mizrahi S (2012) Mechanisms of objectionable textural changes by microwave reheating of 
foods: a review. J Food Sci 77:R57–R62. doi:  10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02515.x      
    23.    Ryynanen S, Ohlsson T (1996) Microwave heating uniformity of ready meals as affected by 
placement, composition, and geometry. J Food Sci 61:141–148  
    24.    V ollmer M (2004) Physics of the microwave oven. Phys Educ 39:74–81  
     25.    Zhao S, Xiong S, Qui C, Xu Y (2007) Effect of microwaves on rice quality. J Food Prod Res 
43:496–502  
    26.      Kumar MBS (2009) The science and art of Ayurveda. In: Osborne D (ed) Science of the sacred: 
ancient perspectives for modern science. LuLu.com, pp 101–121. doi:  978-0-557-27724-7      
         27.    Jimenez-Monreal AM, Garcia-Diz L, Martinez-Tome M, Mariscal M, Murcia MA (2009) 
Inﬂ uence of cooking methods on antioxidant activity of vegetables. J Food Sci 74:H97–H103. 
doi:  10.1111/j.1750-3841.2009.01091.x      D.I. Lurie
159
      28.    Sultana B, Anwar F, Iqbal S (2008) The effect of different cooking methods on the antioxidant 
activity of some vegetables from Pakistan. Int J Food Sci Technol 43:56–567  
     29.    Miglio C, Chiavaro E, Visconti A, Fogliano V , Pellegrini N (2008) Effects of different cooking 
methods on nutritional and physicochemical characteristics of selected vegetables. J Agric 
Food Chem 56:139–147. doi:  10.1021/jf072304b      
      30.    Turkmen N, Sari F, Velioglu S (2005) The effect of cooking methods on total phenolics and 
antioxidant activity of selected green vegetables. Food Chem 93:713–718  
     31.    Song L, Thornalley PJ (2007) Effect of storage, processing and cooking on glucosinolate con-
tent of Brassica vegetables. Food Chem Toxicol 45:216–224. doi:  10.1016/j.fct.2006.07.021      
    32.    Yuan GF, Sun B, Yuan J, Wang QM (2009) Effects of different cooking methods on health- 
promoting compounds of broccoli. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 10:580–588. doi:  10.1631/jzus.
B0920051      
    33.    Lopez-Berenguer C, Carvajal M, Moreno DA, Garcia-Viguera C (2007) Effects of microwave 
cooking conditions on bioactive compounds present in broccoli inﬂ  orescences. J Agric Food 
Chem 55:10001–10007. doi:  10.1021/jf071680t      
    34.    Moreno DA, López-Berenguer C, Garcia-Viguera C (2007) Effects of stir-fry cooking with 
different edible oils on the phytochemical composition of broccoli. J Food Sci 72:S64–S68  
     35.    Bernhardt S, Schlich E (2006) Impact of different cooking methods on food quality: retention 
of lipophilic vitamins in fresh and frozen vegetables. J Food Eng 77:327–333  
    36.    Pellegrini N, Chiavaro E, Gardana C, Mazzeo T, Contino D, Gallo M, Riso P, Fogliano V , 
Porrini M (2010) Effect of different cooking methods on color, phytochemical concentration, 
and antioxidant capacity of raw and frozen brassica vegetables. J Agric Food Chem 58:4310–
4321. doi:  10.1021/jf904306r      
       37.    Archer DL (2004) Freezing: an underutilized food safety technology? Int J Food Microbiol 
90:127–138  
      38.    Czarnowska M, Gujska E (2012) Effect of freezing technology and storage conditions on 
folate content in selected vegetables. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 67:401–406. doi:  10.1007/
s11130-012-0312-2      
      39.    Leygonie C, Britz TJ, Hoffman LC (2012) Impact of freezing and thawing on the quality of 
meat: review. Meat Sci 91:93–98. doi:  10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.01.013      
    40.    Wagner JA, Ason MC (1985) Effect of freezing rate on the denaturation of myoﬁ  brillar pro-
teins. Int J Food Sci Technol 20:735–744  
     41.    Kushi LH, Doyle C, McCullough M, Rock CL, Demark-Wahnefried W, Bandera EV , Gapstur 
S, Patel A V , Andrews K, Gansler T, American Cancer Society N & Physical Activity Guidelines 
Advisory C (2012) American Cancer Society Guidelines on nutrition and physical activity for 
cancer prevention: reducing the risk of cancer with healthy food choices and physical activity. 
CA Cancer J Clin 62:30–67. doi:  10.3322/caac.20140      
    42.    Gerhardsson de Verdier M, Hagman U, Peters RK, Steineck G, Overvik E (1991) Meat, cooking 
methods and colorectal cancer: a case-referent study in Stockholm. Int J Cancer 49:520–525  
    43.    Tang D, Liu JJ, Rundle A, Neslund-Dudas C, Savera AT, Bock CH, Nock NL, Yang JJ, Rybicki 
BA (2007) Grilled meat consumption and PhIP-DNA adducts in prostate carcinogenesis. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16:803–808. doi:  10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0973      
     44.    Farhadian A, Jinap S, Abas F, Sakar ZI (2010) Determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons in grilled meat. Food Control 21:606–610  
     45.    Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K, Nakagama H, Nagao M (2004) Heterocyclic amines: mutagens/
carcinogens produced during cooking of meat and ﬁ  sh. Cancer Sci 95:290–299  
    46.    Ubagai T, Ochiai M, Kawamori T, Imai H, Sugimura T, Nagao M, Nakagama H (2002) 
Efﬁ cient induction of rat large intestinal tumors with a new spectrum of mutations by intermit-
tent administration of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine in combination with 
a high fat diet. Carcinogenesis 23:197–200  
    47.    Salmon CP, Knize MG, Panteleakos FN, Wu RW, Nelson DO, Felton JS (2000) Minimization 
of heterocyclic amines and thermal inactivation of  Escherichia coli   in fried ground beef. J Natl 
Cancer Inst 92:1773–1778  
     48.    Ritz E, Hahn K, Ketteler M, Kuhlmann MK, Mann J (2012) Phosphate additives in food–a 
health risk. Dtsch Arztebl Int 109:49–55. doi:  10.3238/arztebl.2012.0049      11 A Scientiﬁ  c Examination of Western Dietary Practices as They Relate to Food…
160
      49.    Hu MC, Shiizaki K, Kuro-o M, Moe OW (2013) Fibroblast growth factor 23 and Klotho: 
physiology and pathophysiology of an endocrine network of mineral metabolism. Annu Rev 
Physiol 75:503–533. doi:  10.1146/annurev-physiol-030212-183727      
    50.    Shahidi F (2009) Nutraceuticals and functional foods: whole versus processed foods. Trends 
Food Sci Technol 20:376–387  
    51.    Rao A V , Ali A (2007) Biologically active phytochemicals in human health: lycopene. Int J 
Food Prop 10:279–288  
    52.    Block G (2004) Foods contributing to energy intake in the US: data from NHANES III and 
NHANES 1999–2000. J Food Compos Anal 17:439–447  
     53.    Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM, de Castro IR, Cannon G (2011) Increasing consumption 
of ultra-processed foods and likely impact on human health: evidence from Brazil. Public 
Health Nutr 14:5–13. doi:  10.1017/S1368980010003241      
     54.    Lustig RH, Schmidt LA, Brindis CD (2012) Public health: the toxic truth about sugar. Nature 
482:27–29. doi:  10.1038/482027a      
     55.    Block JP, Scribner RA, DeSalvo KB (2004) Fast food, race/ethnicity, and income: a geo-
graphic analysis. Am J Prev Med 27:211–217. doi:  10.1016/j.amepre.2004.06.007      
    56.    Diamond J (2011) Medicine: diabetes in India. Nature 469:478–479. doi:  10.1038/469478a      
        57.    Annapoorani A, Anilakumar KR, Khanum F, Murthy NA, Bawa AS (2010) Studies on the 
physicochemical characteristics of heated honey, honey mixed with ghee and their food con-
sumption pattern by rats. Ayu 31:141–146. doi:  10.4103/0974-8520.72363      
     58.    Sserunjogi ML, Abrahamsen RK, Narvhus J (1998) A review paper: current knowledge of 
ghee and related products. Int Dairy J 8:677–688  
    59.    Subramanian R, Umesh Hebbar H, Rastogi NK (2007) Processing of honey: a review. Int J 
Food Prop 10:127–143  
        60.    Turkmen N, Sari F, Poyrazoglu ES, Velioglu YS (2006) Effects of prolonged heating on anti-
oxidant activity and colour of honey. Food Chem 95:653–657  
        61.    Tosi EA, Ré E, Lucero H, Bulacio L (2004) Effect of honey high-temperature short time heat-
ing on parameters related to quality, crystallisation phenomena and fungal inhibition. 
Lebensmitt-Wiss Technol 37:669–678  
    62.    Tosi E, Martinet R, Ortega M, Lucero H, Re E (2008) Honey diastase activity modiﬁ  ed by 
heating. Food Chem 106:883–887  
    63.    Al-Waili NS (2003) Identiﬁ  cation of nitric oxide metabolites in various honeys: effects of 
intravenous honey on plasma and urinary nitric oxide metabolites concentrations. J Med Food 
6:359–364. doi:  10.1089/109662003772519921      
     64.    Koeth RA, Wang Z, Levison BS, Buffa JA, Org E, Sheehy BT, Britt EB, Fu X, Wu Y , Li L, 
Smith JD, Didonato JA, Chen J, Li H, Wu GD, Lewis JD, Warrier M, Brown JM, Krauss RM, 
Tang WH, Bushman FD, Lusis AJ, Hazen SL (2013) Intestinal microbiota metabolism of 
l-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat Med. doi:  10.1038/nm.3145      
   65.    Wolf A, Bray GA, Popkin BM (2007) A short history of beverages and how our body treats 
them. Obes Reviews 9(2): 151–164    D.I. Lurie
161 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition , 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_12, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 201412.1            Introduction 
 Ayurvedic principles of food and nutrition have a universal appeal for their 
 constructive compactness and for the reasonability through which they are pro-pounded. In India, Ayurvedic principles of nutrition are laid deep into the culture in a way that they reach to the level of a routine practice without getting noticed for possession of their special values. 
 The novelty of Ayurvedic food science lies in its integral connectivity with the 
consumer at the same time when connects to the quality of the food. This makes Ayurvedic food propositions completely tailor made where the food is recom-mended in conjunction with the knowledge about the ultimate consumer. This is also important to understand here that the food and consumer matrix in Ayurveda is totally dynamic and thereby the food propositions are highly individualistic yet variable in reference to the conditions warranting a change in food related need or behavior in a particular person. It clearly proposes that it is not the property of food which makes sense but also the consumer sided conditions interplay to determine a ﬁ nal food related outcome in a given condition. 
 Ayurvedic food science proposes the dual nature of food: the one as health pro-
motive, including the convalescent foods to speedup recovery and the conventional food to sustain the health. The others are the foods which are disease promotive either in their entirety or for being helpful in building up a pro disease environment if consumed consistently beyond a normal thresh hold level as per the individual susceptibility. An erratic combination of otherwise two health promotive foods ( viruddahara  ) can also be disease promotive as is identiﬁ  ed in Ayurveda.      Chapter 12   
 From Book to Bedside: Challenges 
of Translating Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition for the Common Beneﬁ  ts 
             Sanjeev     Rastogi    
        S.   Rastogi      ( *) 
  PG Department of Kaya Chikitsa ,  State Ayurvedic College ,     Lucknow,     India    e-mail: rastogisanjeev@rediffmail.com  
162
12.2     Evaluating the Other Side of the Coin: 
The Food Which Can Make One Sick 
 At same time while talking about the pro-health attributes and compositions of the 
food, Ayurveda puts a strong emphasis upon the food which can make one sick 
either because of its absolute anti health properties or because of intake related 
quantitative violation. More over some good foods can also act contrary on the basis 
of their processing, consumption or quantity related faults. Giving emphasis to food 
as the cause of health as well as of disease,  mithya ahara   (inappropriate diet) has 
been considered a generic disease promoter where speciﬁ  city of the food causing 
disease may be linked with the pathogenesis of a speciﬁ  c disease.  
12.3     Food Based Clinical Researches: 
Challenges in Ayurveda 
 Many food related practices prevalent in Indian subcontinent are actually the 
embodiment of Ayurvedic concepts about healthy and unhealthy food practice. 
Surprisingly as many of these fundamentals are there in the practice either as folk-
lore or as a traditional belief, they remain unquestioned and are practiced ritually. 
This is also true that despite of considering food as a vital component of any treat-
ment plan in Ayurveda, serious efforts have not been taken to establish it as a 
dependable management modality in clinical conditions where it may give rise 
some predictable results. Because of ambiguity of the subject and also because of 
unavailability of the research based data to prove its effectiveness as a therapeutic 
agent, use of diet in Ayurvedic clinical practice remained minimal. As the food 
practices recommended in Ayurveda are told to be linked with health beneﬁ  ts or 
with diseases, this would have been imperative to establish these link through vari-
ous epidemiological studies specially the case–control and the cohort studies. 
12.3.1     Questioning About Food: The Difﬁ  culty 
in Epidemiological Studies 
 Because the food practices are not as tangible as other medical therapies or as other 
disease precipitatory or health promotive practices, this becomes difﬁ  cult to frame 
a particular food habit for its link with any health related risk or beneﬁ  t. Food 
Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) had been the sole tools so far to evaluate such links 
between food practices and disease in epidemiological studies [ 1 ]. Prior to the 
development of FFQ conventionally a diet history was used to identify the food 
related behavior of an individual in a case control or cohort study. This conventional 
method of recording the diet history required substantial sum of time and used to be S. Rastogi
163
in the form of unstructured interview taken by a nutritionist. Because of various 
confounding factors operating in between, the results obtained through such histo-
ries have not always been reliable. The results obtained through diet histories are 
found to be as variable as 10–70 % [ 2 ]. Subsequently a simpliﬁ  ed, self- administered, 
and inexpensive form of the diet history was arrived in the form of the food fre-
quency questionnaire [ 3 ]. 
 The development of FFQ has eliminated many inconsistencies associated with 
diet history utilized in earlier food association studies but gradually it was also 
found to be of limited value. FFQ in larger cohort studies and in long term follow 
ups could not lead to the consistent results [ 4 ]. Many strong ﬁ  ndings of links on diet 
and cancer risk from case control studies could not be replicated in cohort studies or 
clinical trials using the FFQ as the study tool [ 5 – 7 ]. Some pragmatic solution have 
recently been proposed to overcome the limitations associated with FFQs to make 
them more dependable and reliable in linking the food behavior and risk of develop-
ing a disease. Of many suggestion the most important ones are to redesign the food 
frequency type of approach, improving the accuracy in quantitative recording of 
food consumption, using computer assisted technologies to keep a track record of 
food related behavior of the participants and using the long term food behavior in 
the case–control format.  
12.3.2     Questioning About Food: Finding Its Relevance 
to Ayurveda 
 Ayurveda links a huge number of food related behavior to a variety of diseases. It 
identiﬁ  es a few food items as completely unwholesome irrespective of the time and 
person of its actual consumption. These are considered  ahitahara   and are largely 
discarded for their health demotive values. On the other hand there are many foods 
and their combination which are health demotive on the basis of the quantity actu-
ally consumed. Food also has got a relation to disease in reference to its combina-
tion with other edibles at the same time. The food processed variously may develop 
a biological incompatibility if combined in a speciﬁ  ed proportion or method to 
another edible which may otherwise is totally devoid of any unhealthy effects. 
 Apathya   or unwholesome diet is being considered as the primary cause to almost 
every disease enlisted in Ayurveda and the disease  dosha   variability is often found 
linked with the type of actual food which is consumed. Unfortunately this huge 
account of Ayurvedic idea of unwholesomeness of food and their association with 
some speciﬁ  c disease or an unhealthy state has never been endorsed scientiﬁ  cally. 
While having an over view with the food related etiopathogenesis of the diseases, 
this is easy to ﬁ  nd certain homologies in many disease conditions. For example 
 prameha   and obesity are found to have similar kind of food enlisted as the cause of 
their initiation. Similarly many hepatobilliary diseases, ulcerative diseases and 
hematological diseases have a similar food based etiology. Ayurveda endorses this 
homology of food based etiopathogenesis and identiﬁ  es two broader food based 12 From Book to Bedside: Challenges of Translating Ayurvedic Science of Food…
164
disease groups. The one caused by excess of nutrition are called  santarpana janya   
disease and the other caused by depletion called  apatarpana janya   disease. This 
account of disease seems much similar to what we conventionally know as diseases 
caused by over and under nutrition. Interestingly the treatment offered in these two 
conditions is just to reverse what caused a disease. It is to offer  santarpana   to them 
who are depleted and  apatarpana   or abolition from them who are over nourished. 
Looking striking simple and appealing however this simple analogy of Ayurvedic 
cause and effect also requires to be tested on the parameters of science before any 
such generalization can be made. 
 What could have been most interesting in case of establishing a cause and effect 
relationship to food and disease in the purview of Ayurveda is to go for a case 
control study with those having a clear diagnosis on Ayurvedic basis [ 8 ]. These 
people might have been identiﬁ  ed for their food habits in the past and then this 
observation might have been compared with a similar control group to check if the 
differences really exist. 
 This food history in Ayurveda is however much more difﬁ  cult to observe and to 
interpret comparing to the food history taken by a conventional nutritionist. As the 
foods are not the sole source of pathogenesis and as they behave differentially 
among different people, a lot of variables are to be taken into account before any 
such correlation may be established. For example the  prakriti   of the consumer, time 
of the consumption, quantity of the consumption and mental state of the consumer 
all is said to affect the net outcome of a food related behavior. Therefore the infer-
ences about the food and its association with diseases are never complete unless 
they are viewed in reference to all the confounding factor and variable which may 
lead to a different outcome.   
12.4     From Abstract to Reality: Challenges of Proving 
the Fundamentals as the Tools of Clinical Practice 
 Ayurvedic science of food and nutrition is full of such thoughts which look appeal-
ing on a metaphysical ground but at the same time fail to appeal to a scientiﬁ  cally 
tuned mind. As these principals are given abundant importance in Ayurveda in 
terms of causes leading to health or disease, this is unquestionable to ﬁ  nd methods 
to perceive them more objectively for their better application in health care. Some 
of the key thoughts of Ayurvedic food science and pragmatic methods to perceive 
them objectively are presented here. 
12.4.1     Consideration of  Guru   and  Laghu   
  Guru   and  laghu   had been the digestibility index of Ayurveda aiming to differentiate 
between easy to digest and difﬁ  cult to digest food items. Although a clear S. Rastogi
165
demarcation between such foods can never be made, we can easily make a 
 digestibility scale on the basis of in vitro analysis of the digestion of certain food 
items. As the digestibility of food often depends upon the state of food and also 
upon the methods of processing, it can be elaborated extensively in terms of various 
factors inﬂ  uencing the ultimate digestion. Methods similar to identify Protein 
digestibility corrected amino acids score (PDCAAS) may prove to be a template for 
such studies [ 9 ]. In vitro digestibility studies may have an edge over the in vivo 
study that they can deal with huge number of substrates at the same time and in 
processed and unprocessed forms exactly in the way as they are proposed for eating. 
Although good and easy to perform, in vitro studies of this kind are also going to be 
questioned for individuality of the digestion which makes the net difference in caus-
ing a healthy or a sick outcome related with food. For the beginning however we 
presume that in vitro digestibility studies may give us sufﬁ  cient lead for how to 
move further. These digestibility studies may also be clubbed with identiﬁ  cation of 
the glycemic index for the same food to see if there are any realistic relations 
between food digestibility and its glycemic load [ 10 ].  
12.4.2     Identifying the Physiological Response to  Rasa   
  Rasa   as an attribute to food is said to be the representative of elemental composition 
of the food. The physiological effects of a food thereby are the responses of the 
elemental predominance and can directly be judged with the help of primary taste of 
the substance. Similar  Rasa   are found to have similar pharmacological actions, this 
hypothesis was proved recently when oleocanthal was found to have similar phar-
macological actions as that of ibuprofen predicted on the basis of their taste [ 11 ]. 
A huge work actually can be done to prove the physiological effects of various  rasa  
both in human and in animal studies. With the development of appropriate measures 
to check the physiological responses upon a ﬁ  xed taste diet, this would be easy to 
conclude if the tastes are having a deﬁ  nitive physiological relationship. A step 
ahead, this observation is also going to give a huge impetus to the Ayurvedic con-
cepts of ﬁ  ve elemental constitution and its subsequent application in the health care.  
12.4.3     Examining the Methods of Eating 
 Ayurveda proposes a very orderly method of consuming the food in order to achieve 
the maximum beneﬁ  ts from the food. Some easy experimental studies can be planned 
to see if the methods of eating make any difference to the physiology and subsequent 
health related outcomes. The experiment can expose the subjects under study to 
certain conditions considered unhealthy in Ayurveda and then can compare the out-
come with that of the controls kept under healthy eating conditions as were recom-
mended in Ayurveda . There can be the human or the animal studies of this kind.  12 From Book to Bedside: Challenges of Translating Ayurvedic Science of Food…
166
12.4.4     Examining the  Agni   in Reference to Age/Time 
of the Day/Season 
 Agni being one most prominent fundamental of Ayurvedic dietetics requires a 
 thorough examination before it can be dependably applied to an evidence based 
health care. Ayurveda proposes that in natural course  agni  is variable as per the age, 
time of the day and season. There are evidences that digestive capabilities get 
diminished as a consequence of aging. There occurs atrophy of gastric mucosa and 
also the liver shrinkage resulting in reduced amount of enzymatic secretion [ 12 ]. 
This reduced metabolic state resembles strikingly to physiological  vata  predomi-
nance of old age. This is also proposed that there are diurnal variations in the human 
physiology which affect the level of enzymatic secretions and subsequent food 
based behavior [ 13 ].  Agni   however is difﬁ  cult to be interpreted through such simple 
methods. A very good example of linking  agni  with that of enzymatic status of the 
human digestive system comes from the clinical observation of the people who had 
undergone eliminative procedures of  panchakarma  . A process like  vamana   and 
 virechana   is said to create diminution of  agni  consequential to the procedure and 
hence requires a periodic repair to rebuild the  agni . Now we know that the mucosal 
cells in the gastrointestinal tract have a regular shedding phenomenon and this phe-
nomenon increases many fold in case of a forced insult to luminal cells, an event 
which occurs during the process of forced purgation or emesis. It takes 3–5 days to 
regenerate such cell to recuperate the digestive capability [ 14 ]. Very meaning fully 
Ayurveda proposes a 3–7 day dietary protocol for such patients who had undergone 
any such procedure just to bring the distorted lumen back into the order. Most sur-
prisingly the dietary regime recommended in these conditions begin with readily 
digestible starches, in endorsement of the fact that amylase secreting cells in the 
lumen are the one who are least affected by any toxin or any insult. This is how we 
ﬁ nd proposal of adding rice starch with oral rehydration solution for its use even in 
cases of acute diarrhea.   
12.5     Conclusions 
 Bringing the Ayurvedic fundamentals of food and nutrition into evidence based, 
user friendly and applicable format in order to enhance their impact upon health 
care is a big deal of work. As many of such principles look abstract, they require a 
serious thinking of how they can be brought into a scientiﬁ  c reality. There can be 
many pragmatic ways as are suggested here and many more can be thought of as per 
the actual need. As this is true with all the traditional systems of health care, they 
require to be experimented for what they actually offer. An Ayurvedic end point 
would therefore be the guiding principle for letting every scientiﬁ  c experiment to 
come into the being.     S. Rastogi
167
   References 
    1.    Kristal AR, Peters U, Potter JD (2005) Is it time to abandon the food frequency questionnaire? 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 14:2826  
    2.    Doll R, Peto R (1981) The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer 
in the United States today. J Natl Cancer Inst 66:1193–1308  
    3.    Stefanik P, Trulson M (1962) Determining the frequency of foods in large group studies. Am J 
Clin Nutr 11:335–343  
    4.       Potter JD (2005) Vegetables, fruit, and cancer. Lancet 366:527–530  
    5.    V oorrips LE, Goldbohm RA, van Poppel G, Sturmans F, Hermus RJJ, van den Brandt PA 
(2000) Vegetable and fruit consumption and risks of colon and rectal cancer in a prospective 
cohort study. Am J Epidemiol 152:1081–1092  
   6.    Schatzkin A, Lanza E, Corle D et al (2000) Lack of effect of a low-fat, high-ﬁ  ber diet on the 
recurrence of colorectal adenomas. N Engl J Med 342:1149–1155  
    7.    Alberts DS, Martinez ME, Roe DJ et al (2000) Lack of effect of a high-ﬁ  ber cereal supplement 
on the recurrence of colorectal adenomas. N Engl J Med 342:156–162  
    8.    Rastogi S (2012) Transforming Ayurveda: stepping into the realm of evidence – based  practice. 
In: Rastogi S, Chiappelli F, Ramchandani MH, Singh RH (eds) Evidence based practice in 
complementary and alternative medicine: perspectives, protocols, problems and potentials in 
Ayurveda. Springer, Berlin, pp 33–50  
    9.    Bhatty RS, Slinkard AE, Sosulski FW (1976) Chemical composition and protein characteris-
tics of lentils. Can J Plant Sci 56(4):787–794. doi:  10.4141/cjps76-128      
    10.    Miller JB, Pang E, Bramall L (1992) Rice: a high or low glycemic index food? Am J Clin Nutr 
56(6):1034–1036  
    11.    Beauchamp GK, Keast RSJ, Morel D, Lin J, Pika J, Han Q, Lee C-H, Smith AB, Breslin PAS 
(2005) Phytochemistry: ibuprofen-like activity in extra-virgin olive oil. Nature 437:45–46  
    12.    Lovat LB (1996) Age related changes in gut physiology and nutritional status. Gut 38:
306–309  
    13.    Cummings DE, Purnell JQ, Frayo RS, Schmidova K, Wisse BE, Weigle DS (2001) A prepran-
dial rise in plasma ghrelin levels suggests a role in meal initiation in humans. Diabetes 
50(8):1714–1719  
    14.    Okamoto R, Watanabe M (2004) Molecular and clinical basis for the regeneration of human 
gastrointestinal epithelia. J Gastroenterol 39(1):1–6    12 From Book to Bedside: Challenges of Translating Ayurvedic Science of Food…
169 S. Rastogi (ed.), Ayurvedic Science of Food and Nutrition, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014  A  
  ACS.    See  American Cancer Society (ACS) 
    Agni bala   
 bioﬁ re system , 15  
  Dhatus   , 16  
 examining, Ayurvedic dietetics , 166   GI , 6    jatharagni, dhatvagni   and  bhutagni   , 4–5  
  kapha   , 6–7  
  Panchabhautic   composition , 17  
  prakriti   , 5–6  
    Ahara matra   , 8, 15, 19  
    Allium cepa   , 112  
    Allium sativum   , 110–111  
   American Cancer Society (ACS) , 151     Ames, B.N. , 53     Anjana, R.M. , 59–64     Arankalle, D.V . , 133     Archer, D.L. , 150     Ayurveda.    See also   Food and nutrition, 
Ayurveda 
 CAM , 118   cancer   ( see  Cancer) 
 carbonated beverages , 143–145   fasting , 131   food preparation   ( see  Food preparation) 
 garlic , 110   ice-cold food and beverages , 141–143   indigenous system , 118   nutrition theory   ( see  Nutrition) 
 plants and medicinal properties , 108   polyherbal formulations , 108–109   processed foods   ( see  Processed foods) 
 spices , 119  
   Ayurvedic diet 
 classiﬁ  cation, Charaka , 31  
 compatibility and incompatibility , 30–32   description , 25  
 dhatwagni , 30   dietary guidelines , 32–33   dining   ( see  Dining, Ayurveda) 
 drugs and foods , 25   food and healing process   
( see  Food and healing process) 
 food and properties , 29–30   freezers, food storage , 30   GIT , 30   gut microﬂ  ora , 25–26  
 healthy food  vs.  fast food , 37  
 incompatible foods and eating , 31, 32   metabolism , 31   method, food preparation , 33   satmya and asatmya , 32  
   Ayurvedic dietetics and nutrition 
  Ahara, Agni and Srotas   , 15–16  
 conventional  vs.  traditional 
understanding , 21  
 dietary incompatibility , 19   dietary supplements and nutraceuticals , 
19–20  
 food and material components   
( see  Food and material 
components) 
 holistic and inclusive approach , 18   host biofactors   ( see  Host biofactors, 
ayurvedic nutrition) 
 life-style factor, health and 
disease , 22  
  Pathya   and  
Apathya   , 15  
  Prakriti   and  Vikriti   , 18  
 processing and consumption , 19   pronature approach , 18    Rasayana therapy   , 16  
 recommendations , 140–141                       Index 
170
    B  
  Banerjee, S. , 94     Beck Depression Index , 42     Bedside to book.    See  Translational research, 
Ayurvedic Science 
   Biomedicine 
 pathogenesis , 67   traditional health care , 68  
   Bitter gourd  (Momordica charantia)   , 116  
   Black pepper  (Piper nigrum)   , 113  
   Block, G. , 89  
    C  
  CAM.    See  Complementary and alternative 
medicine (CAM) 
   Cancer 
 angiogenesis , 83   Ayurveda   ( see  Ayurveda) 
 body-control systems , 84   causes , 81   complementary and alternative medicine 
practices , 82  
 diagnosis , 84   diet   ( see  Diet and cancer prevention) 
 diet and prevention   ( see  Diet and cancer 
prevention) 
 dietary phytochemicals , 81   disease-preventive and health-promotion , 98  
 DNA mutations , 83–84   DNA repair genes , 83    Doshas   , 85, 98  
 environmental factors , 82   epidemiology , 81   ﬂ avonoids and procyanidins , 89  
 fruits , 90–91   herbs   ( see  Herbs and cancer prevention) 
 hormones , 83   intrinsic factors , 82   natural products , 89   oncogenes , 82–83   outcomes, lifestyle error , 84–85   plant polyphenols , 89   prevention , 81–82   spices   ( see  Spices and cancer prevention) 
 stem cells , 83   suppressor genes , 83   therapeutic approach , 82, 84   tobacco smoke , 84   treatments , 81   tumorigenesis , 84   vegetables , 89–90  
    Capcicum frutescens   , 113  
    Capsicum annuum   , 113–114     Carbonated beverages 
 calories , 145   CO 
2  , 143  
 description , 143   gastric distention , 144   GERD , 143–144   health and GI system , 143   LES and tLESr , 144   noncaloric , 144  
   1-Carbon metabolic pathway , 52     Chaudhari, P. , 67–78     Chili  (Capcicum frutescens)   , 113  
   Clinical practice 
  Agni   examining , 166  
 description , 164   eating methods , 165    Guru   and  Laghu   , 164–165  
 physiological response to Rasa , 165  
   Clinical research.    See  Food based clinical 
researches 
   Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale , 42     Complementary and alternative medicine 
(CAM) , 118  
   Convalescent food 
 Ayurveda treatment , 67   biomedicine , 68   body’s healing process , 78   curative therapeutic interventions , 67   description , 68   pathogenesis , 67    pathya kalpana     (  see Pathya kalpana  ) 
 rice   ( see  Rice) 
  samsarjana krama   , 78  
   Cooking 
 method, convalescent food   
( see  Convalescent food) 
 microwave   ( see  Microwave cooking) 
    Curcuma longa   , 114–115  
   Curry leaf  (Murraya koenigii)   , 115–116  
   Czarnowska, M. , 150  
    D  
  Diet and cancer prevention 
 chemoprevention agents , 87   eating habits , 86   high salt , 86   Indian food ingredients , 86–87   and lifestyle , 82   oxidative stress , 87   physical inactivity , 86   phytochemicals , 81   surveys , 86   vegetarian , 86  Index
171
   Diet and lifestyle interventions 
 conventional biomedicine , 50   genetic uniqueness 
 bioactives , 51   1-carbon metabolic pathway , 52   chronic disease phenotypes , 52   “omic” science , 51   stress/environmental exposures , 51–52  
 global pandemic, chronic diseases , 50   health and wellness , 53–55   health disparities stemming , 50   medical paradigms , 50   modern-day practice, integrative nutrition , 51   multifunctional nutrients and bioactives , 
52–53  
 salutogenic strategies , 50–51  
   Dining, Ayurveda 
 concentration and time-consuming 
meals , 34–35  
 fast foods , 36–37   food eaten, right time and proper 
manner , 33–34  
 fresh food , 35   raw food , 35–36  
   Dragsted, L.O. , 89  
    E  
  Eating behavior 
 Ayurvedic principles , 45   emotions , 42    Karana   , 11  
  Prakriti   , 10–11  
  Sanyoga   , 11  
 stress inﬂ  uences, human , 41  
   ECG.    See  Epicatechingallate (ECG) 
   EGC.    See  Epigallocatechin (EGC) 
   EGCG.    See  Epigallocatechingallate (EGCG) 
   Epicatechingallate (ECG) , 54     Epigallocatechin (EGC) , 54     Epigallocatechingallate (EGCG) , 54     Evidence based medicine , 134  
    F  
  Fast foods 
 acrylamide , 36   cresol , 37   HNE , 36   Jataragni, Bhootagni and Dhatwagni , 36   metabolic inhibition and thiol oxidation , 36   methylglyoxal , 36  
   Fasting 
 advantages , 126   anabolic processes , 125  
 ancient and universal practice , 123   in Ayurveda , 131   baptism and communion , 124   beneﬁ  ts , 127–128  
 cleansing , 125   conditions , 127   disadvantages , 126   disorders, mind and body , 132   healing , 129   in Indian scriptures , 124   integrative medicine (IM) approach , 133   irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) , 133   mental acuity enhancement , 128   methods , 132   in naturopathy , 131–132   old age , 133   period of abstinence , 124   psychological and environmental stresses , 
133–134  
 recommendations , 126–127   religious , 123–124   rest , 125   rheumatoid arthritis and ﬁ  bromyalgia , 133  
 starvation , 125   therapeutic modality   ( see  Therapeutic 
modality, fasting) 
 treatment, physical ailments , 126  
   Food and healing process 
 action, individual tastes , 28   classiﬁ  cation , 26–27  
  Doshas   , 27–28  
 food consistency , 26   humors , 27   postdigestive taste , 29   tastes inﬂ  uence , 27  
   Food and health 
 Ayurveda , 108–109   dietary modiﬁ  cations , 119  
 free radical scavengers/antioxidants 
 accumulation , 109   nutraceuticals , 109   probiotics , 109–110   properties , 109  
 “grandma’s recipes” , 108   herbs and spices , 107, 119   individual’s food intake , 119   plants, ayurvedic medicine , 117–118   synergy , 119   therapeutics   ( see  Therapeutics, 
food and health) 
 traditional Indian and Chinese 
medicine , 119  
 vegetables and fruits , 107  Index
172
   Food and material components 
 gunas/physical properties and attributes , 17    Panchabhautic   composition , 17  
  Panchamahabhutas   , 16  
 sources , 17–18  
   Food and nutrition, Ayurveda 
  Agni bala     (  see Agni bala  ) 
  Ahara matra   , 4, 8  
  anupahatya prakriti   and  yatha kaalam 
jaram gacchati   , 7  
 contemporary factors , 8   description , 3   food digestibility index , 9–10   food-related factors , 7    matrashi syata   and  charaka samhita   , 3  
 preparation and intake   
( see  Food preparation) 
 qualitative attributes , 12   requirements, gender and age , 4   SSS , 9   translation and nutrition   
( see  Translational medicine) 
   Food as medicine 
 caloric intakes , 50   description , 49   diet and lifestyle interventions   
( see  Diet and lifestyle interventions) 
 dietary intakes , 49–50   genetic endowments , 50   hunter-gatherers , 49   Paleolithic food supply , 49  
   Food based clinical researches 
 difﬁ culty, epidemiological studies , 
162–163  
 healthy and unhealthy food practice , 162   relevance to Ayurveda , 163–164  
   Food bio-actives 
 cell signaling, cytokines and eicosanoids , 53   gene interactions , 50   informational molecule , 51   and multifunctional nutrients , 52–53  
   Food digestibility index 
 description , 9    Guru   and  Laghu   foods , 10  
 SDSs , 9–10  
   Food preparation 
 cooking methods, vegetables , 147–149   description , 145   freezing   ( see  Freezing) 
 and intake, Ayurveda 
  karana   , 11  
 methods , 11–12    prakriti   , 10–11  
  sanyoga   , 11   microwave cooking , 145–147  
 preparation, meat , 151  
   Food synergy approach 
 beneﬁ  cial health outcomes , 55  
 food components , 53–54   global dietary patterns , 55    in vivo   and  in vitro   evidence , 54  
   Freezing 
 bacterial spores, protozoa and 
Salmonella , 150  
 bio-chemical reactions , 150–151   blanching , 150   denaturation, meat proteins , 150   ice cellars , 149–150   and storage , 150   TBARS , 151  
   Fresh food consumption , 35     Fukudo, S. , 133     Functional foods, diabetes , 62, 64  
    G  
  Gandhi, M.K. , 124, 131     Garlic  (Allium sativum)   , 110–111  
   Gastroesophageal reﬂ  ux disease (GERD) 
 and carbonated beverages , 144   carbonation and esophagus , 143   medical community , 143–144  
   Gastrointestinal (GI) , 6     Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) , 30     GERD.    See  Gastroesophageal reﬂ  ux disease 
(GERD) 
   GI.    See  Gastrointestinal (GI) 
   Ginger  (Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale)   , 111–112  
   GIT.    See  Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) 
   β-Glucan , 64  
   Grapes  (Vitis venifera)   , 116–117  
   Gujska, E. , 150  
    H  
  Hamoui, N. , 144     Healing through fasting , 129     Health and wellness, food as medicine 
 cellular mechanisms and physiological 
processes , 53  
 dietary nutrient and nonnutrient factors , 54   dietary pattern analysis , 55   food synergy approach , 53–54   green tea polyphenols , 54   nutritional advantages and disadvantages , 55   spices and herbs , 54  
   Healthy diet 
 bidirectional communication , 34  Index
173
 cresol , 37  
 satmya and asatmya , 32  
   Herbs and cancer prevention 
 ayurvedic medicine , 94   dietary phytochemicals , 94   green tea , 94, 97   healing method , 94   holy basil/tulsi , 97   neem , 97–98   and plants, ayurvedic anticancer treatment , 
94–96  
  sadabahar/catharanthus roseus   , 94  
 vinblastine and vincristine , 94   water , 94  
   HMF.    See  Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) 
content 
   HNE.    See  4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE) 
   Honey and ghee 
 antioxidants , 155   Diastase enzyme , 155   heat and thermal processing , 154   HMF levels , 155   Indian diet , 154   Maillard reaction , 154–155   researchers , 155  
   Host biofactors, ayurvedic nutrition 
 food, diet and nutrition , 21   integrity,  Agnibala   and  Srotabala   , 20  
  Nyayas   , 20–21  
  Srotamsi   , 20  
   Huber, R. , 134     Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) 
content , 155  
   4-Hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE) , 36  
    I  
  IBS.    See  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 
   Ice-cold food and beverages 
 cold, high-fat substance , 141   hypothesized effect, GI system , 142   inhibit digestion , 141   mean intragastric temperature , 141   TRPA1 activation , 142  
    Illicium verum   , 115  
   IM.    See  Integrative medicine (IM) approach 
   Incompatible diet , 31, 32     Indian scriptures, fasting , 124     Integrative and functional nutrition 
 biological systems , 55   calories and nutrients, homeostasis , 53  
   Integrative medicine (IM) approach , 133     Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) , 133     12-Item food frequency questionnaire , 42      J  
  Juuhi  (Jasminum auriculatum)   , 95  
    K  
  Kanazawa, M. , 133     Kumar, S. , 25–37  
    L  
  LES.    See  Lower esophageal sphincter (LES) 
   Leygonie, C. , 151     Lindlahr, H. , 130     Linear regression analysis , 42     Lotus  (Nelumbo nicifera)   , 116  
   Lower esophageal sphincter (LES) 
 carbonated beverages , 144   and tLESr , 144  
   Lurie, D.I. , 139–157  
    M  
  Maillard reaction , 154–155     Manobala, K. , 59–64     MCTs.    See  Medium-chain triglycerides 
(MCTs) 
   Meat preparation , 151     Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) , 63     Mental acuity enhancement , 128     Michalsen, A. , 133     Microwave cooking 
 analysis, rice , 146–147   conventional heating , 145   deﬁ ned, BV  , 147  
 electromagnetic waves , 145–146   fat content , 147   industrialized world , 145   NIRS , 147   nonuniform temperature distribution , 146   photons and ovens , 146   scientiﬁ  c community , 147  
 starch solubility and amylose solution , 146   treatment , 146  
   Modi, K.M. , 132     Mohan, V . , 59–64      Momordica charantia   , 116  
    Murraya koenigii   , 115–116  
    Myristica fragans   , 112  
    N  
  Naturopathy, fasting , 131–132     NDOs.    See  Nondigestible oligosaccharides 
(NDOs) Index
174
   Near-infrared reﬂ  ectance spectroscopy 
(NIRS) , 147  
    Nelumbo nicifera   , 116  
   NIRS.    See  Near-infrared reﬂ  ectance 
spectroscopy (NIRS) 
   Nondigestible oligosaccharides (NDOs) , 64     Nutmeg  (Myristica fragans)   , 112  
   Nutraceuticals , 109     Nutrition.    See also   Ayurvedic dietetics and 
nutrition 
 advantages and disadvantages , 55   chronic degenerative diseases , 49   food components , 53   food preparation practices , 140   health and preventing disease , 139   health centers , 139   industrialized food supply , 50   long-latency deﬁ  ciencies/insufﬁ  ciencies , 53  
 modern microwave food , 140   organic, fresh and homegrown foods , 
139–140  
 overcooking , 139   principles , 51   spices , 140   with Western dietitians , 140  
    O  
   Ocimum sanctum   , 115  
   Omega-3 fatty acids , 62–63     Onion  (Allium cepa)   , 112  
    P  
  PAHs.    See  Polycylic aromatic hydrodocarbons 
(PAHs) 
   Pal, R. , 107–119     Pal, S.K. , 81–98     Pant, K.K. , 107–119      Pathya  .    See  Convalescent food 
    Pathya-apathya   , 19  
    Pathya kalpana   
 advantages, rice and lentil mix , 76   aged  vs.  fresh rice , 74  
 agni , 73   cooking method , 73   glycemic index and food processing 
method , 77–78  
 lentil broth and soup , 76–77   puriﬁ  cation process , 73  
 water soaking and boiling, rice grains , 74–76  
   PDCAAS.    See  Protein digestibility corrected 
amino acids score (PDCAAS) 
   Phosphates , 152     Physiological response to Rasa , 165     Phytonutrients , 61  
    Piper nigrum   , 113  
   Polycylic aromatic hydrodocarbons (PAHs) , 151  
   PPAT.    See  Prototype prakriti analysis tool (PPAT) 
    Prakriti   
 body type , 5   description , 5   food requirements , 5–6  
   Probiotics , 109–110     Processed foods 
 foods reﬁ  ning , 153  
 honey and ghee , 154–155   modern Ayurvedic diet , 152   phosphates , 152   ultra-processed foods , 153–154  
   Protein digestibility corrected amino acids 
score (PDCAAS) , 165  
   Prototype prakriti analysis tool (PPAT) , 12  
    R  
  Raj, S. , 49–55      Rasayana   
  Astanga Ayurveda   , 19  
 dietary supplements , 16    Medhya Rasayana   , 20  
    Rasayana therapy
  , 16  
   Rastogi, D. , 123–134     Rastogi, R. , 123–134     Rastogi, S. , 3–13, 39–45, 67–78, 161–166     Raw food , 35–36     Red pepper  (Capsicum annuum)   , 113–114  
   R e ﬁ ned grains , 60, 61  
   Resistant starch (RS) , 63     Reverse pharmacology 
 antioxidant potential, piperine , 113   Ayurvedic claims , 113–114   ginger aqueous extract, rhizome , 112   growth-inhibiting effects, resveratrol , 117   molecular biology techniques , 115   therapeutic potential, nutmeg , 112  
   Rice 
  bhakta   , 70  
 convalescent food , 68   and lentils 
  krishara   , 70  
  shuka dhanya   , 72  
  yusha   , 73  
  manda   , 68–69  
  peya  , 69  
 type and age , 68    vilepi   , 69–70  
  yavagu   , 70–72  
   Ritz, E. , 152     RS.    See  Resistant starch (RS) Index
175
    S  
  Sandsa, A.L. , 10     SDSs.    See  Slowly digested starches (SDSs) 
   Sensory-speciﬁ  c satiety (SSS) , 9, 12  
   Shelton, H. , 124, 128, 129, 131     Singh, R.H. , 15–22     Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) , 51     Slowly digested starches (SDSs) , 9–10     SNPs.    See  Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) 
   Spices and cancer prevention 
 cardamom , 94   cinnamon bark , 94   clove , 93–94   curcumin , 92   garlic , 93   ginger , 92   hippocrates , 91–92   Indian , 92   plant foods , 92   turmeric , 92  
   SSS.    See  Sensory-speciﬁ  c satiety (SSS) 
   Star anise  (Illicium verum)   , 115  
   Stress-linked food behavior, Ayurvedics 
  asta aahara vidhi vesheshayatana   , 39  
 diseases 
 ATF3, stress gene , 40   cortisol , 40   psychological stress , 40   vagal activation , 41  
 food behavior 
 chronic life stress , 41   cross-sectional survey , 42   Dutch Eating Behaviour Questionnaire 
(DEBQ) , 42  
 emotional/ nonemotional eater , 41   emotion induction , 41   high-fat (HF) and low-fat (LF) snacks , 42  
 self-administered questionnaires , 42   stress–eating relationship , 42   suppression, effects , 41–42   unhealthy food and depression , 42–43  
 food–consumer–environment matrix , 39   food consumption 
 accessory foods  (Ishta 
sarvopakaranam)   , 44  
 ambience and mental attitude, 
guidelines , 45  
 appropriate place  (Ishte deshe)   , 43  
 preferences and requirements 
(A tmanambhisamikshya samyaka  ) , 45  
 social gatherings , 43   speciﬁ  c eating principles , 43  
 talking  (Ajalpana)  /laughing  
(Ahasana)   , 44   while eating  (Tanmana bhunjeet)   , 45  
 workplace stress , 43  
 inﬂ ammation, diet and behavior , 40–41  
   Sugimura, T. , 151     Sultana, B. , 148  
    T  
  Tamarind  (Tamarindus indica)   , 114  
   TBARS.    See  Thiobarbituric acid reactive 
substances (TBARS) 
   Therapeutic modality, fasting 
 contemporary evidences , 130–131   empirical evidences 
 assimilation, food , 129   broken bones, wounds and open 
sores , 130  
 nervous and mental functions , 130  
   Therapeutics, food and health 
 bitter gourd , 116   black pepper , 113   chili , 113   curry leaf , 115–116   extraction, green tea , 110   garlic , 110–111   ginger , 111–112   grapes , 116–117   lotus , 116   nutmeg , 112   oils , 110   onion , 112   qualities, food products , 110   red pepper , 113–114   star anise , 115   tamarind , 114   traditional knowledge , 107–108   tulsi , 115   turmeric , 114–115  
   Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances 
(TBARS) , 151  
   Translational medicine 
  Guru   and  Laghu   , 13  
 PPAT , 12    prabhava   , 13  
  prakriti   , 12–13  
   Translational research, Ayurvedic Science 
 food based clinical researches  
 ( see  Food based clinical researches) 
 food propositions , 161   health and disease promotives , 161   principles, nutrition , 161   pro-health attributes and compositions, 
food , 162  
 tools, clinical practice   ( see  Clinical practice) 
   Tulsi  (Ocimum sanctum)   , 115  Index
176
   Turkmen, N. , 148  
   Turmeric  (Curcuma longa)   , 114–115  
   Type 2 diabetes 
 “afﬂ uenza” , 60  
 awareness, brown rice , 61–62   dietary and food habits, Indians , 59   dietary patterns , 59   functional foods , 62   Green Revolution , 59–60   high-carbohydrate diets , 60, 61   MCTs , 63   modernization and lifestyle modiﬁ  cations , 64  
 NDOs , 64   obesity , 60   oil intake and metabolic syndrome , 62   omega-3 fatty acids , 62–63   prevalence , 59   reﬁ ned grains , 60, 61  
 RS , 63  
    U  
  Ultra-processed foods 
 classiﬁ  cation, Brazilian study , 153  
 consumption, reﬁ  ned sugar , 153–154   description , 153  
 fast foods and low-nutrition 
foods , 154  
 negative health issues , 154  
    V  
  Vaidya, R. , 59–64     Vasudevan, S. , 59–64      Vitis venifera   , 116–117  
    W  
  Wolf, A. , 144  
    Y  
   Yavagu  , rice-based therapeutic 
preparations , 166  
    Z  
   Zingiber ofﬁ  cinale   , 111–112  
       Index


