=== everyday_Ayurvedha.pdf ===
  
Everyday  
Ayurveda  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Practical Guide to  
Healthy Living  
 
 
Danny Cavanagh & Carol Willis  
 
 
Discover the ancient Ayurvedic secrets of balancing the mind and body  
for health, happiness and fulfilment  

  
Ayurveda UK  
 
Published by:  
Ayurveda UK  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2004 by Danny Cavanagh  
 
PO Box 5761, Burton -on-Trent, DE13 9YW  
Tel: 0870 744 1508  
www.ayurveda.uk.com  
info@ayurveda.uk.com  
 
 
 
 
All rights reserved.  
This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form without permission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Every effort has been made to ensure the information contained in this booklet is complete and accurate.  
However, neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to 
the reader .  The ideas, procedures and suggestions offered in this book are not intended as a substitute 
for consulting with your physician.  All matters regarding health require medical supervision.  Neither 
the author nor the publisher shall be liable or responsib le for any loss, injury or damage allegedly 
arising from any information suggested in this book.  
 

 The Practical Guide to  
Healthy Living  
 
 
Danny Cavanagh & Carol Willis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
He whose happiness is within,  
whose contentment is within,  
whose light is all within,  
that yogi, being one with Brahman,  
attains eternal freedom in divine consciousness  
~ Bhagavad -Gita ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents  
 
Body types & n utrition  Page  1 
Body -type questionnaire  Page  2 
Understanding Vata, Pitta & Kapha  Page  6 
The dosha family go shoppin g Page  7 
Vata dosha  & Vata balancing diet  Page  9 
Pitta dosha  & Pitta balancing diet  Page  11 
Kapha dosha  & Kapha balancing diet  Page  13 
Recommendations for losing weight  Page  16 
A balanced diet and the six tastes  Page  17 
Improving digestion & maintaining he alth Page  18 
Other nutritional considerations  Page  23 
Adverse effects of microwaved food  Page  25 
Summary of dietary principles  Page  27 
The day starts the day before  Page  28 
Daily routines, exercise & yoga  Page  29 
Dinac hary a  Page  30 
Nature’s natural cycles  Page  33 
The ideal daily routine  Page  34 
Oil massage  & daily massage plan  Page  35 
So-hum meditation  Page  38 
Pranayama  Page  40 
Exercise  & daily exercise plan  Page  42 
Ayurvedic warm -up exercises  Page  46 
Yoga post ures & Sun Salute  Page  47 
Yoga practice guideli nes Page  50 
Yoga Nidra  Page  51 
Summary of lifestyle principles  Page  56 
Ayurveda detox programs  Page  57 
Background  to Panchakarma  Page  60 
Stages of panchakarma – shamana & purvakarma  Page  61 
Stages of panchakarma – virechana  Page  62 
Stages of panchakarma – samsarjana krama  Page  63 
Stages of panchakarma – basti Page  64 
Stages of panchakarma – rasayana  Page  65 
Stages of panchakarma – post treatment  Page  66 
Panchakarma detox – foods to favour/avoid  Page  67 
Panchakarma detox – post treatment meal routines  Page  68 
Castor oil  &  G h e e  Page  69 
Maintaining good health  Page  71 
Ayurvedic therapies  Page  72 
Dhatus  Page  75 
Panchakarma FAQ  Page  77 
Other detox options introduction  Page  79 
The Mini D etox Page  80 
The Dh al  D etox Page  81 
The Lemon D etox Page  82 
The Combination D etox Page  83 
Recommended D etox options  Page  84 
Healthy drinks  Page  85 
Ayurvedic herbs & oils  Page  86 
Classification of h erbs used in Ayurveda  Page  87 
Ayurvedic herbs  Page  90 
Triphala & Aloe Vera  Page  92 
Herbal formulas for common ailments  Page  93 
Guide to u sing aromatic oils  Page  97 
 ii Practical therapies  & advise  Page  99 
N a s y a  Page  100 
Skin brushing, tongue cleansing & neti pot  Page  102 
The Bates Method  Page  103 
Eye exercises  & Netra Program  Page  104 
Balancing the female cycle  Page  106 
How to keep joints healt hy Page  109 
How to cope with allergies  Page  111 
Stress free vacations  Page  113 
Tip for air travel  Page  114 
Balancing the mind & emotions  Page  115 
How to be happy & peaceful  Page  116 
Key points for cultivating mental peace  Page  120 
The Enquiry  Page  121 
Thou ght field therapy (Tft)  Page  123 
Stress free vacations  Page  126 
Tips for air travel  Page  127 
Accomplishing goals  Page  94 
Starting an Ayurvedic lifestyle  Page  98 
Mantras & healing sounds  Page  129 
Lakshmi, Ganesha, Gayatri, Maha Mrityunjaya, Dhanvantre , Kube ra mantra s Page  131  
Shiva , Mani , Dattatreya , Vasudeva , Tara , Taraka rama mantras  Page  132 
Planetary healing & protective mantras  Page  133 
Planetary strengthening & vastu mantras  Page  134 
Chakra mantras  Page  134 
Bija shakti mantras  Page  135 
Healing sounds  Page  136 
Additional mantra information  Page  137 
Overtoning  Page  140 
Recipes  Page  141 
Dhal  Page  142 
Sauc es Page  143 
Churnas  Page  144 
Chutneys  Page  145 
Dips  Page  146 
Dressings  Page  147 
Vegetables  Page  148 
Curry dishes  Page  150 
Rice dishes  Page  151 
Grain dish es Page  152 
Soups  Page  153 
Deserts  Page  156 
Herbal teas  Page  157 
Lassi & Raita  Page  159 
Juices  Page  160 
Other drinks & d igestives  Page  161 
Milk drinks  Page  162 
Ghee  Page  163 
Chapatis  Page  164 
For the kitchen  Page  165 
Inspirational Q uot e s  & Sayings  Page  166 
Appendices  Page  174 
Toxins in your bathroom  Page  176 
Suntan lotions  Page  177 
Recommended reading  Page  179 
Scientific references  Page  181 
Glossary  Page  182 
Resources  Page  183 
 About the Authors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Danny Cavanagh and Carol Willis began their stud y of Ayurveda in the late 1980s and trained as 
Ayurvedic Panchakarma Technicians at the Maharishi University of Valkenburg in Holland in 1993.  Since 
that time they have also studied with the renowned Dr Vacant Lad at the Ayurvedic Institute in New 
Mex ico and Dr David Frawley and Atreya Smith at the American and European Institute of Ayurveda. The 
subjects they have studied include pulse reading, Ayurvedic herbology, Ayurvedic diet and nutrition and 
Marma therapy. They gave up their careers as Nature Reserv e Warden and Photographer respectively and 
decided to dedicate their lives to passing on this ancient knowledge of rejuvenation and revitalisation to 
others.  
 
They have run many centres across the UK and have treated thousands of clients, including many hi gh-
profile celebrities and members of the royal family.  In their role as both massage therapists and personal 
development/stress management counsellors they have witnessed extraordinary improvements in the 
quality of life of many of their guests due to th e power of the programs they administer.  
 
Presently they run a very exclusive Panchakarma detox and stress management service in Staffordshire 
where they take one client at a time and gently guide them in the Ayurvedic way of living harmoniously 
with their  environment.  Each client receives instruction in meditation, yoga and exercise and advice on 
diet and nutrition but the highlight of each day is often the luxurious two -hour massage and detoxification 
therapy they receive.  Danny and Carol also offer bus iness clients a detox retreat program in a beautiful 
setting in the Peak District as, amongst other things, the knowledge of body -types is an invaluable aid to 
understanding their colleagues’ innate strengths, weaknesses and behaviour.  Learning in a group  is an 
excellent team building exercise and helps forge and strengthen business relationships.  As if their 
schedule isn’t busy enough, they also occasionally administer Ayurvedic detox and education retreats in 
Europe and the USA, travelling with their te am of Ayurvedic massage technicians and custom -built 
treatment equipment to their client’s homes, albeit usually very large homes.  
 
Primarily, they consider themselves facilitators and maintain that, whilst they may help carry out the 
various massage and c ounselling therapies, it is the client who ultimately allows the changes to their 
health, emotions, behaviour and healing to take place.  They are committed to spreading the knowledge of 
Ayurveda and spend much of their time acting as an advice service to both clients and public alike.  
 

 Introduction  
   
This book has been compiled to provide a practical help guide to those interested in following a healthy 
Ayurvedic lifestyle.  With complementary therapies and esoteric philosophies becoming much more 
widely  accepted and available in the west many people are interested in finding out more.  However, 
whilst there is a wealth of information in the public domain, there is little in the way of sound, practical 
advice available to the lay person, especially in the  field of Ayurveda.  We hope this book will address 
some of these shortfalls and provide a practical basis for self -improvement.  
 
As an all encompassing holistic health -care system, the science of Ayurveda can be viewed as an 
umbrella discipline or ‘mother ’ of many modern -day alternative therapies. Having been a successful 
primary health -care modality for millions of people for many thousands of years it’s translation as ‘the 
knowledge of life’ is most apt.  The oldest written records originate in India and  date back over 2000 
years  and its recommendations and advice for healthy living are as relevant today t h e y  ever were – and 
probably even more so.  
 
An important aspect of Ayurveda lies in its ability to understand and describe the subtle energies and 
intelligence flowing through our bodies . Ayurvedic doctors skilled in the ancient practice of pulse reading 
are able to accurately diagnose imbalances in an individual on a mental, physical, emotional and spiritual 
level . This allows them to prescribe very effe ctive herbal and behavioural remedies. Unfortunately, as this 
skill is traditionally passed down verbally from one generation of Vaidyas (Ayurvedic doctors) to the 
next, much of this art has been lost and it is now rarely taught in Ayurvedic collages and u niversities. It is 
not a subject we will address in this book but it is well worth finding an Ayurvedic practitioner that is 
skilled in this field if you have severe chronic health problems.  
 
However, the Ayurvedic texts contain  a treasure trove of knowle dge based on its profound understanding 
of the deeper workings of nature and the rhythms and cycles that govern all life on earth. This knowledge 
is practical, easy to understand and is suitable for anyone interested in improving their physical, mental 
and spiritual health.  It is our aim to faithfully present this knowledge in clear, easy -to-follow steps which 
you can slowly introduce into your life if you have choose to take responsibility for your own health and 
well-being and are willing to dedicate a l ittle time and effort.  
 
In the first chapter you will learn how to ascertain your unique Ayurvedic body -type. You will also learn 
how to recognise imbalances in your body -type when you stray from your natural way of being and, most 
importantly, how you can  rectify them through diet and lifestyle adaptations. If we insist in following 
inappropriate diets or lifestyles for prolonged periods of time our body begins to malfunction and slowly 
but surely deteriorates. As toxins build up in the mind and body we be come prone to persistent aches and 
pains and feelings of unease, anxiety or depression. If these signs and symptoms of ‘dis -ease’ are left 
unchecked we eventually begin to show signs of premature aging and suffer from more chronic 
conditions. By following the guidelines for your particular body -type or imbalance the immune, 
digestive, endocrine and nervous system will be gently and naturally brought back into balance and good 
health and a calm, focused mind will ensue.  
 
F i r stly you should identify your body -type - the body -type questionnaire will help  you do this .  A visit to 
an Ayurvedic consultant trained in pulse reading will help ensure a more accurate assessment but as these 
are still few and far between in the west the questionnaire is the next best al ternative.  Once you have 
ascertained your psycho -physiological make -up it is then a simple matter of following the general 
guidelines for your specific doshic make -up (body -t y p e ) . However, you may need to adapt this slightly
 to take account of the time of  year and the imbalances that are present in your physiology.  If you’re one 
of the lucky few who are relatively well balanced you’ll probably find you are naturally following some 
of these practices already.  
 
It is worth bearing in mind that m aintaining g ood digestion and ensuring a clean , fully -functioning colon 
are the key to physical health, mental well -being, spiritual harmony and the absence of ‘dis -ease’.  Eating 
the right foods to balance your body -type is the key to proper digestion.  Different bod y-types require 
very different foods but once you know your Ayurvedic body -type you can tailor the foods you eat on a 
regular basis to help keep the mind and body functioning properly and operating in perfect balance.  The 
key is moderation and maintaining  an adequate supply of the foods that are good for you and reducing 
those that aren’t so good.  Also, the secret of attaining your perfect weight isn’t necessarily totally 
dependant on regulating the amount you eat or the number of calories you consume, bu t more often t h e 
choice of foods you eat, the times at which they are eaten and the manner in which they are eaten.  
 
In chapter two we introduce you to the natural cycles of nature and describe methods that can be utilised 
for to keep your physiology in al ignment with these ever -changing patterns of energy.  Although we can’t 
see these energy cycles we can feel their varying ‘flavours’ as day turns to night or summer turns to 
winter.  We can also witness the unpleasant effects of falling out of alignment wi th these cycles but, 
conversely, can also enjoy the pleasure of keeping in tune with the rhythm of these energy flows.  The 
exercise and yoga routines will keep the body supple and free of toxins, while the breathing exercises and 
meditation will help bala nce the mind.  A balanced mind creates calmness, health and vitality.  
 
Lifestyle and behaviour play another key role in maintaining balance and harmony in your mind and body 
and again different b ody-types require slightly different approaches. However, the  exercise and yoga 
routines we’ve included in this book  can be followed by just about anyone and will have a beneficial 
effect on the health and wellbeing of everyone who is motivated to putting in a little practice  each day .  
You should consult your GP be fore undertaking any physical exercise if you have, or have had, any 
medical problems or feel unwell or unfit.  As yoga is very popular nowadays it should be relatively easy 
to find a competent Yoga instructor in your local area who can advise you further and tailor your practice 
to suit your level of health, suppleness and fitness.  However, always remember that yoga is not about 
pushing, straining and contorting the body un -naturally – each posture should be eased into slowly, 
gracefully and gently, leavi ng the body feeling refreshed and invigorated – not worn out and aching.  The 
adage, ‘no pain, no gain’ has no place in the Ayurvedic Yoga system.  
 
Following our instructions for balancing the breath (pranayama) and settling the mind (meditation) are 
power ful ways to begin to experience profound levels of inner peace and harmony in a very short space of 
time.  These techniques are now widely accepted as scientifically valid ways to improve health and reduce 
stress on a deep psychological level.  Many large corporations, especially in the USA and Japan , have 
trained their key staff in these skills to help them cope with the ever -increasing pressures of the modern -
day work environment whilst also improving their competitive edge and resourcefulness.  Of course  t h e r e 
are side -effects – reduced weight, stronge r digestion, increased immunity  and a peaceful, relaxed mind.  
 
In chapter three we introduce the concept of ‘the detox’.  From an Ayurvedic standpoint the digestive 
tract is often the primary source of illne ss and keeping it balanced and fully -functioning is of utmost 
importance.  Eating the right foods for your body -type with reference to the seasons is the first place to 
start.  However, especially in the west and especially in today’s fast -paced society, g etting adequate 
nutrition at the right time of day and in the right environment can be very difficult.  To compound this, 
the food we eat is often refined, processed and lacking in the essential nutrients we need to maintain, let 
alone improve, our bodies.   A ‘detox’ is designed to gently remove impurities from the body in a way that 
works in harmony with it.  Detoxing should be an enjoyable experience that should leave the body feeling 
light, vibrant and full of energy –‘no pain, no gain’ has no part in Ay urveda.  Struggle, strain and 
 un-natural diets will only imbalance the body further and should be avoided.  Detox programs  are best 
done under the supervision of a qualified nutritionist but there is no harm in trying them yourself as long 
as you stop as soon as you begin to experience any unpleasant ‘detoxing symptoms’ (headaches, nausea 
etc). 
 
We’ve also included an overview of some of the therapies that may be administered during Panchakarma 
(an Ayurveda detox program). Ayurveda employs a wide range of powerful massage techniques to help 
rectify imbalances within the physiology, many involving two technicians working in harmony on either 
side of the body.  Most Ayurvedic massages are luxuriously relaxing, to soothe the body and calm the 
mind, while other s are more stimulating, to energise the body and mobilise impurities.  Treatment plans 
are usually individually tailored, so whether you need to relax the mind or purify and revitalise the whole 
body a suitable treatment package will be prescribed to help bring the body back into balance.  However, 
on a daily basis you can also carry out your own ‘mini -massage’ – it is simple to do and highly effective 
in delaying the signs of aging, toning the skin and helping strengthen the immune system.  This section 
wi ll also help you understand the benefits of improving your digestion and keeping your bowels cleansed 
and healthy for optimum assimilation of nutrients.  
 
As well as herbal oil massages, Panchakarma detox programs also utilise bastis; herbal oil enemas, whic h 
scientific studies have shown to increase the effective elimination of impurities by up to sixty percent. 
They are an essential component if you wish to lose weight, improve complexion or remove long -
standing aches and pains from the muscles and joints.  If you desire a flatter belly and a healthy glow 
these are the key to success.  
 
Chapter four contains a glossary of both Ayurvedic and western terminology used to describe the 
properties of herb and essential oils. It also includes a list of herbal formu las and the conditions they can 
be used for.  Chapter five is dedicated to practical therapies and techniques you can do at home .  T h e r e  i s  
information  on nasal cleansing, to unblock the sinuses , and advise on how to cope  with allergies. T h er e  i s  
also inform ation on joint problems and how they can be rectified, as well as some valuable information 
and remedies for female related problems.  
 
Chapter six gives practical advice for balancing the mind and resolving emotional conflicts. We’ve also 
included a sectio n on Thought Field Therapy , a powerful technique developed by Dr. Roger Challahan, a 
clinical psychologist from the USA. By utilising this techniqu e you can learn how t o ‘tap’ some powerful 
meridian points that can relieve some of life’s most stubborn obs tacles to growth and development  such 
as phobias and fears .  
 
We have included a chapter on mantra chanting for you to experiment with. Many of our clients have had 
extraordinary results by introducing some of these mantras into their daily liv es. We have also included a 
section of our favourite recipes to give you some idea of the types of meals you can prepare using 
ayurvedic principles. Each recipe provides a foundation on which you can experiment and adapt to your 
own particular tastes.  Many are these recipes are tri -doshic and therefore suitable for all body -ty pe s ; 
especially with the addition of churnas (herb and spice combinations).  
 
Finally, we’ve included a selection of famous quotes and saying in which we hope you’ ll find elements of 
truth or insp iration relative to your own life path.  We trust they will help motivate you move forward on 
your journey towards a more fulfilling, more healthy, more joyous life.  
 
The ‘ Resources’ section, in the appendices, contains the website addresses for obtaining some of the 
products, herbs, oils and supplements mentioned in this guide.  
 1 Chapter 1  
Ayurvedic body -types & n utrition  
~ how to live in tune with our constitution & eat a healthy diet  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change is not something that we should fear.  
Rather, it  is something that we should welcome.  
For without change, nothing in this world would ever grow or blossom,  
and no one in this world would ever move forward  
to become the person they’re meant to be.  
~ anon ~ 
 

 2 The Body -Type Questionnaire  
 
 
 
The body -type q uestionnaire that follows should be filled in to help ascertain your predominant 
Ayurvedic dosha or body -type.  Tick any attributes, abilities, conditions and states of mind or afflictions 
that apply to you.  If you are unsure about any of the questions yo u may wish to consult a friend who 
knows you well and can perhaps be more objective.  In reality the questionnaire is more likely to reveal 
the particular doshas that are out of balance within your physiology.  This is especially so if the bottom 
half of t he Vata, Pitta or Kapha questionnaire pages are ticked in preference to, or as well as, the top half.  
For a more thorough understanding or your body -type it is best to consult an Ayurvedic practitioner who 
will also read your pulse.  
 
The questionnaire wil l also help you understand the traits and physical and mental characteristics of each 
body -type.  Each of us has a unique body -type, usually with one type (dosha) very prominent and one 
close behind.  Thus, a person with many Vata traits (lots of boxes tic ked), fewer Pitta traits (less boxes 
ticked) and very few Kapha traits (few boxes ticked) would be deemed a Vata/Pitta body -type.  In this 
example it could also be that the Vata traits show up mainly in the physical characteristics of the person 
(right sid e of page) and the Pitta traits show up mainly in the mental or emotion side of the person (left 
side of page). Each and every one of us has characterises of all three doshas in our physiology but one or 
two of the doshas usua lly show up more predominantly . 
 
Vata is composed of the elements of ether and air and governs the principle of movement and 
communication in our physiology. Pitta is composed of the elements of fire and water and governs the 
principle of energy and transformation in our physiology. It  allows us to digest, absorb and assimilate 
food, liquid and ideas. Kapha is composed of the elements of water and earth and governs the principle of 
cohesion or structure. It is the ‘glue’ that holds or binds our physiology together.  
 
It is our unique com bination and percentage of each dosha; vata, pitta and kapha, that governs how we 
interact with the rest of the relative universe. Our unique body -type gives us absolute individuality and 
once we intimately understand, not only our own but other peoples, b ody-types we naturally behave more 
tolerantly and become more gentle, more forgiving and less critical both of ourselves and others.  With 
this understanding comes not only the will and courage to adapt to our own strengths and weaknesses but 
the ability t o keep them in balance and functioning optimally.  
 
Once you have filled in the body -type questionnaire and ascertained your unique Ayurvedic body -t y p e  
you can then follow the recommendations that follow to help stay balanced and healthy. If you have 
ticked  many of the boxes on the lower part of the vata, pitta or kapha questionnaire pages this indicates an 
imbalance in that particular dosha. Even if this is not your predominant dosha (most ticks) you should 
nevertheless balance this dosha first by following  the recommendations for balancing that dosha.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Vata body type  
 
 
 
 
   Enthusiastic  
  Outgoing  
  Creative  
  Vibrant  
  Imaginative  
  Flexible/adaptable  
  Sensitive  
  Spontaneous  
  Sociable  
  Excitable  
  Active  
  Learn quickly  
  Talkative  
  Speak qui ckly 
  Restless  
  Anxious  
  Worried  
  Fearful  
  Indecisive  
  Over -exert  
  Poor memory  
  Absent -minded  
  Easily fatigued  
  Emotional  
  Mood swings  
  Forgetful  
  Poor endurance  
  Unsettled sleep  
  Frequent dreams  
  Disturbing dreams  
  Short sleep  
  Fast walk er   Tall 
  Short  
  Light weight  
  Small/thin boned  
  Hard to gain weight  
  Underweight  
  Dark/dull skin  
  Dry/thin skin  
  Dry/thin hair  
  Dark hair  
  Small eyes  
  Thin eyebrows  
  Thin/small mouth  
  Small teeth  
  Irregular teeth  
  Small hands/feet  
  Brittl e/rough nails  
  Stiff joints  
  Poor circulation  
  Cold hands/feet  
  Feel cold easily  
  Sweat very little  
  Chapped skin  
  Irregular meal times  
  Low thirst  
  Constipation  
  Flatulence  
  Lower back problems  
  Headaches  
  Sharp pains  
  Cramps  
  Frequent PMT  
 
 
Total:  ………           Total:  ………  
 
 
Vata (air) qualities:  Light, clear, moving, cold, rough, course, brittle, small  
Locations in body:  Colon, bladder, kidneys, bones, legs, feet, rectum  
Functions:  Movement, communication, transportation, thought, circula tion, 
respiration, elimination  
 4 Pitta body type  
 
 
 
 
  Efficient  
  Precise  
  Orderly  
  Strong intellect  
  S t r o n g -minded  
  Enjoy challenges  
  Courageous  
  Perfectionist  
  Good leader  
  Organised  
  Cheerful  
  Energetic  
  Enterprising  
  Conscientious  
  Determ ined 
  Hard working  
  Generous  
  Conte nt  
  Motivated  
  Ambitious  
  Anger easily  
  Irritable  
  Intolerant  
  Forceful  
  Stubborn  
  Impatient  
  Demanding  
  Critical  
  Domineering  
  Obsessive  
  Aggressive  
  Competitive    Medium build  
  Medium weight  
  Strong a ppetite  
  Strong thirst  
  Large eater  
  Gain/lose weight easily  
  Thin, fine, straight hair  
  Ginger, blond or sandy hair  
  Balding or early greying hair  
  Ruddy, rosy skin  
  Warm, slightly oily skin  
  Many moles/freckles  
  Good circulation  
  Warm hands an d feet  
  Neat, well proportioned teeth  
  Burn easily in sun  
  Prone to acne  
  Overheat easily  
  Prone to fevers  
  Heartburn/acid stomach  
  Diarrhoea  
  Sweat profusely  
  Eye complaints  
  Red, flushed complexion  
  Prone to ulcers  
  Excessive hunger/thirst  
  Inflammation in skin & eyes  
  Bad breath  
  Heart problems  
  Prone to rashes  
  Difficulty skipping meals  
  Eyestrain
 
 
Total:  ………           Total:  ………  
 
 
Pitta (fire) qualities:  Hot, sharp, fluid, slightly oily, sour, pungent, acidic, light  
Locations in bod y : Stomach, eyes, small intestines, sweat, plasma, lymph, blood  
Functions:   Transformation, heat production, digestion, metabolism  
 5 Kapha body type  
 
 
 
 
  Calm  
  Stable  
  Even -tempered  
  Patient  
  Affectionate  
  Slow to anger  
  Unflappable/tranquil  
  Compa ssionate  
  Very caring  
  Very tolerant  
  Very forgiving  
  Very loving  
  Very kind  
  Very considerate  
  Home -loving  
  High pain threshold  
  Conservative  
  Possessiveness  
  Hoarder  
  Suffer from boredom  
  Suffer from deep depressions  
  Sleep excessively  
  Lethargic  
  Lazy  
  Overly complacent  
  Slow to get going in morning  
  Emotions hidden away  
  Greedy  
  Inflexible  
  Procrastinator  
  Dullness  
  Self-pity   Strong body  
  Firm body  
  Strong immune system  
  Slow digestion  
  Meals easily skipped  
  Large, round f ace 
  Large, thick lips  
  Large, round, white eyes  
  Thick, bushy eyebrows  
  Large hands and feet  
  Thick boned  
  Thick skin  
  Cold, oily skin  
  Large, white teeth  
  Thick and wavy hair  
  Pale complexion  
  Soft, smooth skin  
  Suffer in cold, damp weather  
  Prone to excess weight  
  Hard to lose weight  
  Easily gain weight  
  Lethargic on waking  
  Need lots of sleep  
  Sleep during day  
  Lack energy  
  Prone to chest colds/flu  
  Sinus/lung congestion  
  Prone to asthma/bronchitis  
  Prone to allergies  
  Prone to swelling  
  Joint/muscle stiffness  
  Indigestion
 
 
Total:  ………           Total:  ………  
 
 
Kapha (earth) qualities:   Slow, steady, stable, sweet, soft, sticky, cold, heavy, dull  
Locations in body:   Chest, neck, head, joints, stomach, small intestines  
Functions:     Structure, cohesion, lubrication  
 6 Understanding Vata, Pitta & Kapha  
 
Vata, pitta and Kapha are known as doshas in Ayurveda; they are the underlying principles that govern 
the nature, transformation and structure of the physical universe.  Each dosha is  composed of two of the 
five elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth) and it is the specific combination of these elements that 
determines each doshas characteristic qualities and ultimately their overall effect in nature. Every object 
in the natural w orld is composed of the elements of vata, pitta and kapha and it is the relative proportion 
of each dosha or element that determines its uniqueness and differentiates it from another objects.   
 
Vata is composed of the elements of air and space and its qua lities are light, subtle, moving, cold, dry, 
hard and rough.  Vata governs movement in the mind and body.  Pitta is composed of the elements of fire 
and water and its qualities are hot, acidic, sour and sharp.  Pitta governs transformation in the mind and 
body, whether it’s the digestion, assimilation and metabolism of food and water into energy or the 
digestion and assimilation of thoughts and ideas into actions.  Kapha is composed of the elements of 
earth and water and its qualities are heavy, cold, slow,  binding, sticky and smooth.  Kapha is responsible 
for the density and structure of our body.  
 
A person with a predominance of Vata dosha walks more quickly, has a lighter build and has colder and 
dryer skin than someone with a predominance of Pitta or Kap ha dosha in their constitution.  Vata -type 
people also tend to have very quick, agile minds and can be very creative.  However, if their constitution 
goes out of balance through excessive movement or irregularity they can suffer from feelings of 
restlessne ss, boredom, fear, stress and anxiety. This may manifest in the body as poor circulation, cold 
hands and feet, constipation and dry skin.  
 
A person with more Pitta in their constitution has a hotter, fierier, more dynamic personality.  They have 
lots of ene rgy, high ambitions, sharp intellects and good leadership qualities. However, if they go out of 
balance and their innate ‘fire’ becomes too high they can quickly become angry, stressed and frustrated.  
They generally have a strong digestive fire and immune  system but when they slip out of balance they can 
develop rashes, ulcers, acid stomachs and heart problems.   
 
A person with a predominance of Kapha dosha in their constitution is generally slower, heavier, calmer 
and more grounded than either Pitta or Va ta. They are caring, loving, forgiving individuals with a placid, 
easy-going nature. They have strong, solid bodies but can suffer from weight gain, lethargy and heaviness 
when they are out of balance.  
 
With an understanding of the qualities inherent in t he elements that combine to make up the three doshas 
we are able to keep the doshas in balance in our own bodies and thereby remain healthy, happy and free 
from dis -ease.  Any excessive increase in any of the qualities present in our doshic make -up will te nd to 
aggravate that dosha and will lead to imbalance.  To decrease a quality we need to increase its opposite 
quality. Thus, is we are a predominantly Vata body -type and we become excessively cold or are exposed 
to noisy, busy environments with excess mov ement we will soon become imbalanced and un -grounded.  
If we immediately introduce the opposite qualities of warmth or calmness and quietness we will soon 
bring ourselves back into a grounded, more balanced state. Similarly, for a Pitta person, who has a 
predominance of heat, the opposing quality of coldness will bring them back into balance. A Kapha 
person, who has a predominance of heaviness, will be balanced by the opposing quality of lightness.   
 
I hope the next piece ‘The dosha family go shopping’ wil l help you to understand how extreme Vata, Pitta 
and Kapha body -type people conduct their lives!  
 7 The Dosha family go shopping  
 
 
 
Characters: Mr Kapha Dosha, Mrs Pitta Dosha, Master Vata Dosha  
  
It’s a lovely sunny morning in the beautiful village of Toad bury where the Dosha family are beginning to 
go about their daily business. Mr Kapha Dosha has volunteered to do the shopping whilst Mrs Pitta Dosha 
tidies the house ready for the arrival of their friends later that day. Master Vata Dosha isn’t quite sure 
what he’s going to do on this particular day but he’s rather tired as he’s spent most of the night worrying 
about the gig he’s managed to pull off at the Three Shires Inn later that evening. He’s busy tuning his 
guitar but his mind just won’t settle and he ’s afraid that his debut at this important venue will be a 
complete flop.  
 
In typical Kapha fashion Mr Dosha has woken late again and is still eating his breakfast at 10am. He 
listens patiently to his wife as she rapidly reels off the shopping list – he’s a little distracted by their cat, 
Pretty Polly, who’s in the garden trying to stalk a beady -eyed Blackbird. However, he nods politely and is 
thankful she’s written it all down as usual. He agrees to be back by 11’o’ clock at the latest but hasn’t any 
idea what the time is anyway as he’s misplaced his watch again for the fourth time in a week. As he steps 
out of the house he’s pleasantly amused by the duelling duo again – the cat is now looking rather angry 
and slightly embarrassed as the Blackbird she’s jus t attempted to pounce upon has decided to put an end 
to the silly game. She’d cautiously manoeuvred into her final approach and was all ready to pounce, 
confident of a delicious reward. However, the Blackbird was keenly aware of the cat’s presence and at t h e 
last moment had nonchalantly flown to the top of the garage roof, sung a melodious wee tune and then 
swooped so low over Pretty Polly that she has to duck for cover and almost fell in the goldfish pond in the 
process.  
 
Mr Kapha laughs heartily and takes  a seat by the garden shed to lap up some of the morning sun. He 
listens to the Robins and Linnets, gazes at the Swallows and Swifts catching flies above him and sighs 
deeply as aromas from the honey -scented roses gently drift over on the light, warm breez e. He feels a 
deep gratitude and contentment and gradually dozes off in the sun blissfully unaware of his angry wife 
approaching. She strides purposefully towards him, her ginger hair flowing wildly behind her. He wakes 
abruptly, senses the urgency in her angry reproach as he remembers his shopping duty and makes his way 
to the car. He settles into the car seat, adjusting it slightly to accommodate his somewhat corpulent build, 
puts on some music and slowly backs the car into the street. As he lazily makes his way to the shops his 
mind is still in the garden, soaking up the sun and smelling the fresh roses. He finds a convenient parking 
space, realises he’s forgotten the shopping list and strolls to the precinct via his favourite park with the 
large pink and  red Rhododendrons and majestic Cedar trees.  
 
He can’t resist the sweet, homely smells of the bakery and stops off to buy some doughnuts. He ambles 
into the supermarket and is immediately tempted by the fascinating array of meats and cheeses at the deli 
counter. He chooses a few and tries to remember what Mrs Pitta Dosha had on her shopping list. He 
wishes he’d remembered it – she’d typed it out very neatly and even arranged it in order of the rows in the 
store. However, he does the best he can and makes hi s way home laden with all manner of ‘goodies’ he 
feels will please his guests.  
 
His wife has finished all the housework in record time and has even tidied his office and trimmed the 
bushes in the front garden. However, she’s none too pleased at his late re turn and can’t imagine why on 
earth it’s taken three hours to do a tiny bit of shopping and how in the Lord’s name he could lose the car 
in such a small town. On finding he’s forgotten to buy almost half the groceries on her list she flies off 
 8 into a rage again and slams the door so hard that even the windows in the garden shed rattle a little. She 
screeches tyres as she zooms out onto the street and is at the shops in ten minutes flat. She parks neatly 
near the entrance of the supermarket, clears sweet pac kets and chocolate wrappers out of the car into a 
nearby rubbish -bin and hurries to the isles. She methodically marches down one isle after another, rapidly 
ticking off all the items on her list. She jumps the queue at the fast checkout, packs the food in the boot of 
the car and charges off to the printers to collect some business cards she ordered several weeks before. On 
her way home she gets the car washed at the local garage, selects some choice flowers to brighten the 
living room from the tree nursery and calls in at the hairdressers to check her appointment for later that 
day. She’s home within an hour and quickly unpacks the car before making a quick salad for lunch.  
 
Meanwhile Master Vata Dosha has been searching his chaotic room for the song sheets he’s been 
working on for weeks. He finally finds it half -hidden, torn and crumbled under a tee -shirt amongst all the 
dirty jeans and piles of books by the bathroom door. He’s still undecided as to the most appropriate order 
of play and is completely at a l oss regarding whether or not to start with his own song. He’s been told 
repeatedly that it’s very good but he thinks that perhaps another song – one that ever ybody will almost 
certainly love and be able to identify with would be better. In the frantic flur ry of searching he’s managed 
to knock over his guitar and broken a couple of strings which has stressed him even further as he’s 
forgotten to buy any spares.  
 
He asks his Dad if he can borrow the car, half hears the answer and rushes out of the front door.  He jumps 
in the car, knocks the side mirror in passing and then realises he hasn’t got any car -keys. He grabs them 
from the sideboard and hurries out of the house again and then almost runs over the cat as he backs the 
car out of the driveway. Finally, he  stalls the engine as he hits the kerbs on the other side of the road. His 
erratic driving warrants the attention of a few rather more cautious drivers and their ‘honking’ and hand -
signals agitates him even further.  
 
Once in town he parks haphazardly near the music store and forgets to lock the car. Once in the shop he 
grabs the guitar strings he needs and then quickly dashes back to the car for his wallet. He fiddles with the 
remote key fob and is more than a little confused when he finds the car is now lo cked but presses the 
remote control once again and unlocks it. In his haste he bangs the car mirror back into place but scuffs 
his new suede shoes on the kerb as he narrowly misses knocking over a postman.  
 
On his way home he realises he’s forgotten to pic k up the hair gel he’d intended to buy and turns the car 
round. His usual supplier is completely out so he’s heads to the next village which is also where his friend 
Joe lives. After picking up some gel and shampoo he heads to Joe’s but then realises Joe n eeds the song 
sheets which are back at home. He turns round and heads home only to realise that he’s almost out of fuel 
and needs to make a detour to find a garage. He finally arrives home; flies upstairs, grabs the song -sheets 
and heads back to Joe’s. Joe ’s not in and he’s forgotten to bring his mobile and as Joe’s number is on the 
mobile he has no way of finding out where he is.  He decides to drive home again and try again later. As 
he pulls into the driveway he recognises Joe’s car and suddenly remember s he had arranged to meet him 
at 2pm. He scratches the door of his Dad’s car on the wall as he gets out and apologises profusely to his 
friend for being late.  
 
Joe has brought a new tape and it plays soothingly in the background, his mother has made him hi s 
favourite cup of Chamomile tea and his father has finally got round to typing out his song sheets and 
determined the right order of play. His mind settles and he relaxes briefly. His mother takes a relaxingly 
cool shower, makes herself some peppermint te a and then practices some yoga and meditation for twenty 
minutes. His father, after much procrastination, goes to their gym in the basement and plays some Wagner 
while he exercises for half an hour. By four pm all is settled and peaceful at the Dosha house hold and 
order is restored once again.  
 9 Vata Dosha  
 
Vata  governs all movement  in the mind and body. It controls the flow of blood, the elimination of waste 
products, the act of breathing and the movement of thoughts in the mind. It is considered the leader  of the 
three doshas (energies or energetic principles in the body) as Pitta and Kapha cannot move or exist 
without it. It is therefore imperative that Vata is brought back into balance whenever it is disturbed.  
 
You need to balance the movement of Vata if  many of the following conditions are present:  
 
• Your skin or hair is dry, rough and thin.  
• You feel cold easily or have poor circulation with cold hands and feet.  
• You are chronically underweight and find it difficult to gain weight.  
• Your mind is constantly anxious, restless and agitated and you are prone to worry and fear.  
• You experience constipation or have frequent flatulence.  
• You suffer from insomnia or have unsettled sleep and disturbing dreams.  
• You suffer from vaginal dryness or menstrual cramps and PMT . 
• You have spells of forgetfulness and absent mindedness.  
• You experience discomfort or stiffness in the joints or lower back pain.  
• You easily become fatigued and have poor endurance.  
•  
Tips for balancing Vata:  
 
• Follow a Vata balancing diet favouring cooked foods rather than raw foods and salads.  
• Go to bed early bedtime and have lots of rest.  
• Diffuse calming and grounding aromatic oils or incense into your home and office. Orange, 
geranium, lavender, basil, spruce & fir are excellent in this regard.  
• Maintain a regular daily routine by i ntegrating the ‘Daily R outine’  (see later section).  
• Give yourself an Abhyanga massage using warm sesame oil each morning.  
• Ensure you have regular, daily elimination. Triphala herbal formula helps in this regard.  
• Stay warm, espe cially in cold, windy weather.  
• Take gentle walks in the countryside to calm and balance the mind.  
• Wear calm, soothing colours such as pastels, green or brown.  
• Do not overexert and rest whenever the body becomes tired or over stimulated  
• Relax often by pract icing meditation, pranayama, Yoga or Tai Chi.  
• Chant ‘Ram’ (pronounced ‘rarm’) 108 times each day.  
• Read light, humorous, feel -good novels and turn the television off one hour before bed.  
• Take up walking, fishing, bird -watching or gardening for general relax ation.  
• Take up writing, drawing, painting or acting to balance your creative energies.  
• Avoid excessive talking and try to have a day of silence each week.  
• Wrap up warm and keep dry in the winter - cover your head on cold, windy days.  
• Avoid loud, noisy envi ronments  
• Rest for short periods throughout the day  
• Avoid excessive use of VDU displays
 10 The Vata balancing diet  
 
 
• Favour warm, hearty, nourishing foods with added butter/oil – favour salty, sour and sweet tastes.  
• Try and reduce light, dry, cold foods and pu ngent, bitter and astringent tastes  
• Hot, milky, creamy cereals (wheat, oatmeal or rice), soups and stews are all very good for pacifying Vata.  
• All dairy products are good (ideally organic and unpasturised) – milk should always be boiled first.  
• Oils are goo d but favour ghee, coconut oil, olive oil, Udo’s oil, flax/pumpkin oil and sesame oil.  
• Reduce your intake of light, dry, cold foods such as crackers, nuts, seeds and salads.  
• Take nuts and seeds in small quantities only – they are best freshly ground with o il added.  
• Reduce the intake of all bean products except tofu, mung beans, mung dhal and red lentils . 
• The best grains are rice and wheat but you can take barley, corn, millet, buckwheat, rye and oats in moderation.  
• Favour stewed and well ripened, sweet or s our fruits  but reduce the intake of dry or light fruits such as apples, pears, 
pomegranates, cranberries, and dried fruits (if uncooked) . Dried fruits are good if they are cooked after soaking 
overnight.  
• Sweeteners are good (in moderation), especially jagg ary, honey, maple syrup and algarve.   
• Vegetables should be cooked and not raw. Peas, green leafy vegetables, broccoli, cauliflower, celery, 
zucchini and potatoes are acceptable in moderate quantities if they are cooked, especially with Ghee or oil 
and Vat a reducing spices but it is best to avoid sprouts and cabbage.  
• Hot, nourishing desserts such as apple pie help pacify Vata.  
• Eat a substantial breakfast to help improve energy levels throughout the day.  
• Herbal teas (camomile, fennel, basil) with a few dige stive biscuits are good for Vata energy slumps.  
• Avoid stimulants such as coffee  and alcohol.  
• Sip hot water throughout the day to flush out impurities and balance Vata.  
• Warm milk flavoured with ghee, cardamom, cinnamon and nutmeg is excellent before bed.  
 
 
           Vegetables              Fruits                Herbs/Spices  
 
FAVOUR  RE DUC E  FAVOUR  RE DUC E  FAVOUR  RE DUC E  
Asparagus  
Leeks  
Artichoke  
Okra  
Beetroot  
Parsnip  
Olives  
Corn  
Butternut 
squash  
Green beans  
Peppers  
Radishes  
Carrots  
Courgettes  
Cucumber  
Green bea ns 
Leeks  
Pumpkin  
Sweet potatoes  
Turnip  Broccoli  
Brussels sprouts  
Cabbage  
Cauliflower  
Celery  
Mushrooms  
Peas 
Peppers  
Tomatoes  
 
 Apricots  
Avocados  
Bananas  
Berries  
Cherries  
Raisin s  
Pineapple  
Rhubarb  
Plums  
Peaches  
Oranges  
Lemons  
Grapes  
Ki wi  
Dates  
Figs 
Mangoes  
Melons  
Papayas  
Peaches  
Plums  
  Dried fruit  
Un-ripened fruit  
Apples  
Pears  
Pomegranates  
Prunes  
Watermelon  Basil  
Black pepper  
Cardamom  
Cinnamon  
Clove  
Cumin  
Fennel  
Ginger  
Liquorice  
Marjo ram  
Mustard seeds  
Nutmeg  
Oregano  
Sage  
T h y m e  Coriander seed  
Fenugreek  
P a r sl e y 
Saffron  
Turmeric  
 11 Pitta Dosha  
 
 
Pitta dosha is made up of the elements of fire and water through which it manifests the qualities of pungent, hot, 
penetrating, oily, sharp, liquid, spreading and sour. Its primary function is transformation and is the fo rce of 
metabolic activity in the body associated with the endocrine function, digestion, body temperature, visual 
perception, hunger, thirst, and skin quality. In Western terms we can categorise the activities of pitta in terms of 
amino acids, enzymes, bil e, hydrochloric acid and hormones. This explains the seemingly contradictory 
combination of fire and water to form pitta. Pitta exists as water or oil in the body, thus preserving the tissues 
from the destructive aspect of fire. It resides in the eyes, blo od, sweat glands and lymph but its primary site is in 
the small intestine. Mentally it plays a role in understanding, in digesting sensory impressions.    
 
You need to balance the heat of pitta if many of the following conditions are present:  
 
• Your skin is overly oily and prone to acne.  
• You are prone to rashes, fevers or inflammatory skin conditions  
• You have excessive hunger or thirst.  
• You sweat profusely and have overly hot hands and feet.  
• You suffer from infections, access acidity, ulcers and heart problem s. 
• You are overly aggressive and prone to anger and frustration.  
• You experience lose or hot, watery stools and diarrhoea -type elimination.  
• You tend to be overly critical, domineering, obsessive or controlling in nature.  
• You experience frequent eyestrain or  tension headaches.  
• You are going prematurely grey or balding.  
 
Tips for balancing Pitta:  
 
• Follow a Pitta balancing diet and avoid overly hot, spicy or sour foods.  
• Avoid very heating substances such as red meat, alcohol and tobacco.  
• Avoid excessive fasting  and try to eat when you are hungry.  Don’t skip meals; especially lunch . 
• Exercise moderately (short runs or swims ) and only  when the weather or climate is cool.  
• Walk regularly in nature; especially by the sea . Walk ing in the moonlight is also very benefici al. 
• Especially a void prolonged exercise in v e r y  hot climates or environments.  
• Keep your head and skin protected and refrain from sunbathing  w he n the sun is hot.  
• Reduce your exposure to hot environments such as saunas and  steam rooms.  
• Cultivate peaceful emo tions and spend more time with people who love and fully accept you.  
• Avoid and angry or stressed people  and t ry not to argue – aim to agree more often ! 
• Take the time to be sweet and sociable and find the time to chat, laugh and play.  
• Practice moderation  and find time for enjoying leisure activities and appreciating natural beauty.  
• Avoid overly comp etitive sports, deadlines and confrontation in general . 
• Practice meditation, cooling forms of pranayama and gentle yoga postures.  
• Avoid watching too much televisi on and excessive use of computers.  
• Massage the head with coconut oil at night.  
• Wear cooling colours – blue, purple, green and avoid wearing red colours.  
• Drink pomegranate juice or eat pomegranate seeds. Its astringent and bitter quality helps balance pitta , 
cleanses the liver and blood and works as an excellent heart tonic.  
• Drink 30mls of Aloe Vera each morning.  
 12 The Pitta balancing diet  
 
 
• Generally favour  warm or cool and refreshing foods with the tastes of sweet, bitter and astringent such 
as; asparagus, l ettuce, broccoli , cucumber , raita, mung d hal, summer squashes, courgettes, cilant ro, 
coconut, cucumber, lime and green salads . 
• Avoid very oily, salty, sour, fermented or pungent  foods and spices such as chillies , alcohol , pickles, 
vinegar , hard or pungent cheeses , citrus fruits , sour cream, yoghurt , tomatoes, garlic, onions and chillies 
as they will aggravate  the acid and pitta in the intestines and blood.  
• Enjoy sweet, juicy seasona l fruits such as peaches, figs and berries.  
• Avoid r ed meat  and favour chicke n or fish.  
• Most v egetables , beans and lentils are good unless they are cooked with too much oil . 
• Favour wheat, basmati rice, oats and barley and take corn, millet and rye in moderation.  
• Drink cooling herbal teas such as peppermint, spearmint , rose, coriand er or liquorice.  
• Ghee is cooling and can be used for cooking and spreading on toast.  Coconut oil can also be used for 
cooking whilst Udo’s  oil, flax oil or pumpkin oil can be used for salad dressings.  
• A nourishing breakfast to balance pitta could include cereal, toast and apple juice.  
• Japanese and Chinese type foods and salads are generally good for pitta  digestion . 
• A l w a y s  a void over -eating, especially in the evening.  
 
 
           Vegetables              Fruits                Herbs/Spices  
  
FAVOUR  RE DUC E  FAV O UR  RE DUC E  FAVOUR  RE DUC E  
Asparagus  
Broccoli  
Brussels sprouts  
Cabbage  
Cauliflower  
Celery  
Courgettes  
Cucumber  
Green beans  
Leeks  
Lettuce  
Peas 
Potatoes  
Peppers 
Summer squash  
 Carrots  
Garlic  
Onions  
Radishes  
Spinach  
Tomatoes  
 
 Apples  
Avocados  
Sweet Cherries  
Coconut 
Figs 
Grapes  
Lime  
Mangoes  
Pears  
Pineapple  
Plums  
Prunes  
Raisin s  
 Apricots  
Bananas  
Berries  
Sour cherries  
Cranberries  
Grapefruit  
Papayas  
Peaches  
 Cardamom  
Coriander  
Cinnamon  
Dill 
Fennel  
Fenugreek  
Mint  
Saffron  
Turmeric  
 Barbecue Sauce  
Ketchup  
Mustard  
Pickl es 
Salt 
Sour dressings  
Spicy dressings  
Vinegar  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Kaph a Dosha  
 
Kapha  governs all structure  and lubrication  or fluid balance in the mind and body. It controls weight, growth, 
lubrication for the joints and lungs, and formation of all the seven tissues (lymph, blood, fat, muscles, bones, 
bone marrow or nervous tissue and reproductive tissues).  
You need to balance the heat of Kaph a if many of the following conditions are present:  
• You gain weight easily and  find it very hard to lose weight.  
•  You tend to be  overweight.  
• You often feel dull, bored and lethargic.  
• You lack energy and feel lazy or complacent.  
• You experience sinus problems  
• You have frequent and prolonged chest colds and flu . 
• You suffer from congestive problems  
• You suffer from asthma or bronchitis.  
• You need lots of rest and sleep long hours.  
• You wake up feeling heavy and un-refreshed.  
• You find that you are possessive , greedy  and over -attached.  
• You feel discomfort in cold , damp weather.  
• You experience bloating or water retention.  
• Your digestion is sl ow and heavy even when you have only eaten a small meal.  
• Your joints and muscles  feel stiff and heavy, especially in the morning.  
Tips for balancing Ka ph a: 
 
• Follow a Kaph a balancing diet with plenty of spices and pungent, bitter and astringent tastes . 
• Skip breakfast if you don’t feel hungry.  
• Partake in some v igorous exercise  each day – running, cycling, tennis, squash or rugby.  
• Stay warm in cold, damp weather.  
• Be early to bed and early to rise . 
• Take time to enjoy warm showers . 
• Have a vigorous, dry massage each morning . 
• Wear bright colours – orange, yellow, red . 
• Decorate you house in warm, bright, vibrant colours.  
• Enjoy the sun and spend more time outdoors . 
• Partake in e xciting activities or adventure holidays.  
• Take time out to have fun and meet new people . 
• Seek out variety, embrace new experiences and take up a hobby.  
• Use stimulating essential oils and incense with warming aromas such as pine, eucalyptus, clove, orange, 
basil & sage.   
 
 
 
 14 The Kapha balancing diet  
 
 
• Favour warm to hot foods that are light and dry in quality. They should be cooked with minimal fat and 
water and be predominantly pungent, bitter and astringent in taste.  
• Spicy Indian or Mexican food is good for Kapha as long as not too much oil is used in cooking.  
• Avoid heavy, oily and cold foods a nd foods that have predominantly sweet, sour and salty tastes.  
• Drink 1 litre of hot water with lemon and/or ginger daily. Have barley tea or post -digestive tea after main 
meals to cleanse the tissues, improve digestion, give energy and reduce hunger.   
• Favour baked, grilled or sautéed food in preference to boiled, deep -fried or steamed food.  
• Occasional have small side salads and raw foods to help tone the digestive tract.  
• Avoid fried foods and cold cereals at breakfast – stewed fruit or toast with honey is much better.  
• Favour barley, buckwheat, quinoa, amaranth, corn, millet and rye and limit oats, rice and wheat. Dry 
roasting grains in ghee before cooking helps make them lighter on the digestion.  
• Increase your intake of vegetables but exclude mashed potatoe s, turnips and parsnips.  
• Lighter f ruits, such as apples and pears  are better  for Kapha . Reduce heavy or sour fruits, such as oranges, 
bananas, pineapples, figs, dates, avocados, coconuts and melons.  
• Honey is excellent for reducing Kapha  but generally r educe other sugar products . 
• Spices  are all  fine but reduce salt as it helps retain water and increases Kapha.  
• Limit your intake of milk, butter, ice -cream, biscuits, cakes, chocolate, deep -fried food, white sugar, 
aspartame, tinned beans, fizzy drinks, yeaste d bread, confectionary, sweet fruits, red meat, potatoes, hard 
or aged cheeses, salt and alcohol.  
• Avoid low -fat products as these are highly processed and usually high in sugar.  
• Have rice cakes, rye bread, chapattis and corn bread rather then yeast -r i s en  b read.  
• Pumpkin and sunflower seeds, almonds and walnuts are good but they should be lightly roasted and then 
ground before eating.  
• Most beans are good as long as they are well cooked.  
 
           Vegetables              Fruits                Herbs/Spices  
 
FAVO UR  RE DUC E  FAVOUR  RE DUC E  FAVOUR  RE DUC E  
Asparagus  
Aubergine  
Broccoli  
Brussels sprouts  
Bean sprouts  
Cabbage  
Carrots  
Cauliflower  
Celery (raw)  
Chicory  
Corn  
Green beans  
Fennel  
Lettuce  
Peas 
Peppers  
Potatoes (roast)  
Radish/Spinach  
Swiss Chard  Butternut squash  
Cucumbers  
Courgettes  
Olives  
Potato (mashed)  
Sweet potatoes  
Tomatoes  
Turnips  
 
 Apples  
Apricots  
Berries  
Cherries  
Cranberries  
Grapefruit  
Mangoes  
Papaya  
Peaches  
Pears  
Prunes  
Pomegranates  
Raisin s  
Watermelon  
 
 Avocados  
Bananas  
Coconut  
Dates  
Figs 
Grapes  
Mangoes  
Melons 
Oranges  
Peaches  
Pineapple  
Plums  Most herbs & 
spices esp.  
Black pepper  
Cayenne pepper  
Cinnamon  
Coriander  
Cumin  
Ginger  
Fenugreek  
Hi n g  
Liquorice  
Nutmeg  
Peppermint  
Turmeric  
 
 Sugar  
Aspartame  
Tamarind  
Ketchup  
Lime Pickle  
Mango chutney  
Mayonnaise  
Pickles  
Salt 
Soy sauce  
Yoghurt  
 
 15 More on b alancing kapha  
to reduce  excess weight  
 
 
By balancing the kapha energetic principle in our body we will not only reduce excess fat and water but will also 
increase energy levels, enable the endocrine and digestive system to  function better, and create a more youthful 
appearance. The key factor is to balance digestion as this will help to reduce cravings and normalise appetite.  
 
A Kapha -related weight imbalance is due to a lack of digestive fire (low agni) and low metabolic rate so even 
though we may eat very small amounts of food, we still tend to gain weight. With this type of imbalance 
digestive impurities are being created, fat tissue is accumulating in the body and the formation of bone tissue is 
slowed down due to accum ulation of fat tissue. The solution is to increase the metabolic rate and burn up the 
impurities.  
 
When excess weight accumulates, it blocks nutrient circulation and can aggravate Pitta. This results in excess 
acid, excess thirst, irritability and an inte nse appetite for sweet, heavy, cooling foods — the very kind of foods 
that cause us to gain weight to begin with. The solution is to drink herbalised water containing small amounts of 
fenugreek, coriander and fennel throughout the day. Fenugreek burns fat and helps absorption, coriander 
eliminates toxins, and fennel helps with digestion. To make the water, boil one litre of water and pour into a 
thermos. Add half a teaspoon of ground fenugreek, half a teaspoon of whole coriander seeds and half a teaspoon 
of fennel seeds. Drink throughout the day. A mixture of one part ground turmeric, two parts ground cumin, three 
parts ground coriander and four parts ground fennel should be added to vegetables or legumes during cooking to 
help balance digestion, assimilatio n and stomach acid.  
 
Exercise is one of the main activities that will help to burn ama and increases circulation and metabolism so an 
hour of walking, dancing, swimming or light weight training each day will help enormously.  
Emotional stress is another ke y factor in kapha imbalances and weight gain and can manifest as eating when you 
are not hungry or looking for something sweet to pacify a bad mood. Walking in nature, meditation, yoga and 
pranayama will all help with this situation as will massage and her balised steam therapies.  
 
Patience  is also one of the key factors when attempting to balance Kapha. Kapha moves slowly so follow as 
many of the recommendations as you can and be confident that your body will gradually respond. Some people 
respond almost i mmediately but others may not see drastic changes for many months. However, once the 
blockages are cleared and the digestion is strong the weight will begin to fall away naturally and quite rapidly. 
This is not designed to be a fast method to shed pounds b ut a holistic approach from which you will see 
satisfying results gradually. Once you have built up your digestive fire and the metabolic processes are  balanced, 
your diet can be more flexible . 
 
On the following page is a list of the most important recomme ndations for balancing kapha and shedding excess 
weight. Some of the terms and procedures may be unfamiliar at this point but they will all be explained later in 
the book.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Recommendations for losing weight   
 
 
• Follow a ‘Kapha reducing’ diet.  
• Arise ar ound dawn (5 -6am) as this increases energy levels and helps reduce ama or toxins.  
• Drink a cup of hot water with a slice of lemon on rising in the morning to cleanse the digestive tract of 
metabolic waste products.  
• Massage your head vigorously with coconut oil each morning to sharpen the senses and nourish and 
strengthen your hair.  
• Skin-brush your body each morning to improve blood circulation and help eliminate toxins.  
• Massage under your rib cage with a little sesame oil to help improve digestion.  
• Practice ‘Belly Breath’ (see ‘pranayama’ section).  
• Practice fast pranayama ‘huh -huh-huh’ and chi -uh-ha’ sounds (see section on ‘healing sounds’) to 
increase energy levels, balance the mind, tone the belly and improve digestion.  
• Exercise (jog, swim or cycle) and pra ctice some yoga each morning and evening.  
• Practice meditation (20 mins am and pm) to improve mental clarity and increase energy levels.  
• Have a ten -minute steam -inhalation session once or twice a week with eucalyptus essential oil. Boil 
some water and place  in a sink or bowl, add a drop of oil, place a towel over your head and gently 
breathe in the steam. This especially good if you have blocked sinuses or respiratory allergies.  
• Use a Neti Pot* with tepid saline water each morning (see section on ‘using a Ne ti pot’). This is also 
good for reducing congestion in the head and sinuses.  
• Use Nasya drops* (two in each nostril) each morning to ease sinus congestion, help prevent colds and 
heighten dull senses.  
• Do not skip meals and  eat only when hungry. Eat your lar gest meal at mid -day and only have a light, 
easily digestible supper (soup etc). Do not eat after 7pm.  
• Take ginger pickle (see recipe section ) before each main meal to improve digestion.  
• Drink fresh, organic, homemade carrot (10oz), beetroot (3oz) and cucu mber (3oz) juice (total of 16oz) 
with 1-2 tsp Udo’s oil for breakfast. Alternative juices include: carrot (10oz) and spinach (6oz) or carr ot 
(11oz) and cabbage (5oz). These can also be taken mid -morning and/or mid -afternoon.  
• Decrease your intake of heavy, saturated fats but increase your intake of healthy fats such as flax, hemp, 
pumpkin or Udo’s oil (1 -2 tsp daily). This will help reduce food cravings, lower cholesterol and 
regulate the appetite.  Use these oils on vegetables and salads and as salad dressi ngs. However, do not 
use for cooking or frying but favour minimal amounts of ghee or coconut oil instead.  
• Avoid commercial protein powder drinks. Instead eat live protein filled with the intelligence of nature 
from almonds, walnuts, sunflower seeds, flax s eeds, sesame seeds and pumpkin seeds. These should be 
soaked overnight and ground just before eating (use an equal mix and take two teaspoons per day..  
• Have a fluid day each week (see ‘mini detox’ section – this can be a juice fast or a soup fast).  You ca n 
follow the rounding program described later in this book for extra benefits.  
• Follow a 3 -5 day ‘Master Cleanse’ (see relevant section later in book) every few months.  
• Take Triphala tablets* (2 -3) before bedtime to cleanse the digestive tract.  
• Alternativel y take Guggul Plus* to help reduce cholesterol and excess weight and Punarnava Plus* to 
help with water retention.  
• Take Chywanaprash* (a.k.a. Amrit Kalash) twice a day as an immune system booster. It is very high in 
vitamin C and other anti -oxidants.  
 
* see resources section at and of book ( Pukka herbs ) 
 17 A balanced diet & the six tastes   
 
SWEET   Sugar, milk, butter, ghee , sweet fruit, bread, pasta, grains  
SOUR   Yoghurt, lemon, vinegar, wine, soy sauce, grapefruit, aged cheese  
SALT   Salt (a lso in vegetables;  especially celery and seaweeds)  
PUNGENT  Hot, spicy foods such as pepper, ginger, garlic, cayenne, chilli  
BITTER  Leafy greens, olives, turmeric, horseradish,  turmeric, fenugreek, nettle, lettuce, aloe  
ASTRINGENT  Beans, lentils, dhal, honey, rhubarb, apples , leafy greens, pomegranate, sprouts  
 
The tongue has taste buds which register all the above six tastes.  If the body receives all these tastes in each 
meal it feels satisfied and will not overeat or feel hungry again soon after eating. However, there are far more 
taste buds that register the sweet as opposed to astringent or sour taste. This is because we do not require equal 
amounts of each taste. There are more ‘sweet’ taste buds because this is the taste we require  the most of; s weet 
tasting foods, such  as rice and milk, are nourishing and give us protein, energy and vitality. They are heavy an d 
grounding and are required by Vata types much more than Kapha types .  
 
Bitter tasting foods supply many vitamins, enzymes and minerals. They are also detoxifying , reduce water 
retention and are good as tonics for the liver and blo od. Most are cleansing and help  take away burning and 
itching sensations. In excess they can aggravate vata and dehydrate the body. Astringent tasting foods are also 
diuretic and blood pu rifiers. They help balance pitta and kapha  but in excess can create gas and constipation. 
Spices are certain ly a quick, convenient and flavourful way of incorporating the more unusual bitter and 
astringent tastes. Salt helps the body retain water and maintains substance and grounding, whilst pungent and 
sour tasting foods burn up toxins and stimulate the digesti on.  
 
As different body -types require different quantities  of each taste  we must allow our own innate intelligence to 
determine what combinations it requires in terms of optimum nutrition, especially since this may change on a 
daily and/or seasonal basis. Our limited modern model of nutrition is continually being updated and adapted as 
we discover new groups of molecules (such as vitamins, minerals enzymes and proteins) that our body requires 
to function optimally. It then struggles to determine the appropr iate amount of each vitamin,  mineral, enzyme or 
protein our bodies require and in what combinations they should be taken in. The debate will probably go on 
forever as there are so many variables to consider. However, Ayurveda has a simple solution – simply  accept 
that our own body knows intuitively and instinctively just what it needs at any particular moment. It relays its 
message through our desire for particular taste combinations and we should follow those impulses for maximum 
health. Of course, to be s ure that these signals are getting through we need to remain relaxed, balanced and fully 
aware. The life -style recommendations in this book are designed to facilitate this process.  
 
To summarise: the only effective way to reduce the amount of food you eat and to cut down on unhealthy 
cravings is to include all six tastes in every meal. Furthermore, these six tastes are not required in equal amounts 
but should be combined in proportions to suit your particular body type.  
 
Vata body -t y p e s :  Generally require m ore sweet, sour and salty tastes especially in winter or if stressed.  Meals 
should also be heavy, warm, oily and nourishing (soups and stews are good).  
Pitta body -t y p e s : Generally require more sweet, bitter and astringent tastes especially in summer.  Foo d should 
also be slightly heavy and oily and small cold dishes may be included.  
Kapha body -types:  Generally require more bitter, astringent and pungent tastes, especially in spring or if feeling 
heavy, lethargic or dull minded.  Food should also be light, dry and warm to aid digestion and heavy, oily foods 
and dairy products should be excluded.  
 18 Improving digestion & maintaining health  
 
 
In the west the majority of people suffer from everyday digestion problems such as gas, bloating, 
stomach pain, constipat ion, heartburn, and fatigue after eating. Ayurveda provides simple solutions to 
these common complaints by considering not only what we eat but how we consume our meals.  
 
To ensure food is properly digested, assimilated and metabolised by the body it is im portant to follow 
these guidelines:  
 
• Eat at the times when the body has the necessary enzymes available to cope with the digestion of food.  
The peak time for enzymatic production is mid -day and this is the time to eat the largest meal of the 
day.  By ensu ring that the heaviest foods and largest quantities are eaten at this time, the bodily tissues 
are able to fully utilise the nutritional value of foods consumed.  This helps reduce the amount of food 
required by the body and reduces food cravings between m eals.  It also goes a long way to helping 
reduce weight and maintaining hormone balance.  The evening meal should be light as the body 
produces far less enzymes to help digest food at this period of the day.  You should aim to eat at least 
three hours befo re going to bed and this should therefore be between 5 -7pm.  
 
Have you ever gone out for a late dinner and found that it was a strain to wake up the next morning or 
that it was difficult to be efficient during the following day? These are often the side eff ects of 
improperly digested food. The best way to avoid these problems is to follow nature's prescription of 
suitable times to eat. When the sun is strongest the digestive fire is also strongest. Agni is associated 
with the Sun. This is one of the ways ayu rveda seeks to connect our mind and body with the 
enviro nme nt.  As the sun goes down so does our agni. Late night meals interfere with sleep and after 
10:00 p.m. the body is working to burn off toxins and continue to digest food from the day. If you eat 
after 10:00 p.m., the food may cause toxins to accumulate in the system, and as a result the next day 
you wake up tired. If you are not able to wake up fresh and clear, then it is important to analyze the 
quantity of food and the time of night you are eating dinner.  
 
• Each meal should be taken in a peaceful, pleasant environment and should not be consumed when 
irritated, angry or stressed as this hinders the digestive process and leads to bloating, gas and the build -
up of toxins in the gut. Excessive talk or a noisy environment hinders the digestion and leads to 
undigested food remaining in the body causing wind and bloating.  Watching television or reading 
during eating can also have similar effects. Our bodies need an uplifting and settled environment in 
order  to process and absorb the nutrients from our meals. If that is not available then we should at least 
be sitting down to eat - not standing, walking or driving. The act of eating is life -giving. The process of 
eating, according to ayurveda, is something re verent and important for the development of 
consciousness as well as our physical health. When we sit down to eat our stomach is in a relaxed 
posture and our awareness is on the taste, texture, and smell of the food. This will greatly improve the 
digestion .  
 
• Whilst it is important to drink between 1 -2 litres of water per day, liquid should not be consumed half 
an hour before or one hour after eating as this ensures that the digestive enzymes responsible for 
digesting food aren’t diluted by excessive water intake.  It is, however, useful to sip small amounts of 
hot water with a meal as this aids the digestive process.  Ayurveda recommends taking a small cup of 
‘Post -digestive’ tea (see ‘herbal teas’) to help with the digestive process.  Hot water with fresh ginger, 
lemon, fennel seeds or mint leaves should be sipped throughout the day.  
 
• The next ayurvedic recommendation also addresses agni. Ayurveda recommends avoiding cold drinks 
at meals and ice cold foods in general. This is like putting cold water on the burning logs. Iced water, 
 19 normally served at restaurants, extinguishes the digestive fire. Even juice or milk right out of the 
refrigerator is too cold for the digestion. Juice should be taken at room temperature and water without 
ice. Once you get into th is habit of drinking beverages at room temperature you will notice a dramatic 
improvement in your digestion and the way your body feels while eating and after the meal. Cold drinks 
and foods mixed with warm cooked foods can cause stomach cramps, bloating a nd general discomfort 
in the stomach area. If you have a pitta imbalance you can take cool drinks in -between meals. Cold or 
frozen foods are not recommended for pitta either because even though they may temporarily cool 
down the heat, the agni is still bei ng over stimulated and the imbalance will continue. Try slightly cool 
drinks made with rose water, or milk blended with dates or fresh mangos.  
 
• Avoid caffeine, alcohol and carbonated soft drinks and switch to life -giving, vitality -boosting 
beverage s.  Wate r, that most basic yet most overlooked elixir of life , helps to rehydrate the system and 
flush es toxins from the body.   Water that has been boiled and cooled has the added healing element of 
fire in it. Adding herbs and spices suited to your physiology or designed to correct a specific imbalance 
can enhance the healing quality of the water you drink.   At bedtime, drink a cup of warm milk (boil and 
cool it for added digestibility) blended with a spoonful of ghee, a pinch of ginger, a pinch of  cardamom 
and a  pinch of nutmeg will aid sleep.  
 
• Cut down on sugar, wheat, coffee, tea, alcohol and red meat as these hinder the digestive process, leach 
nutrients and water from the body or block the uptake of nutrients from food.  This is especially so with 
sugar as th is ‘feeds’ the ‘bad’ bacteria in the gut and helps them multiply – this leads to candida, 
bloating, wind and indigestion.  
 
• Another way to improve the digestion is to stimulate the agni or digestive fire before we begin eating. 
Weak digestive agni may resul t in fatigue after eating so  Ayurveda recommends eating a one inch piece 
of fresh ginger with a few drops of lemon juice and a few pinches of salt on it before a full meal. This 
starts to activate the salivary glands, producing the necessary enzymes so tha t the nutrients in the food 
are easily absorbed by the body. See ‘Ginger Pickle’ recipe.   
 
Balancing your digestive agni is a key principle in Ayurvedic medicine. That's why ayurveda 
recommends a number of general practices for better digestion. Digestive  agni can be compared to a 
burning fire. If the flame is very low than it will take a long time to cook the food. In the same way if 
the fire is too big it can burn the food. If we put a huge log on a low fire it will extinguish it. Our 
digestive fires sho uld be balanced so that we can digest our meals efficiently and smoothly.  
 
• Ideally, each main meal should provide the six tastes of bitter, sweet, pungent, astringent, sour and 
salty.  This ensures the nutritional requirements of the body are met and reduc es the need for snacking 
and over -eating. Specific mixtures of herbs or ‘churna’s’ may be added during cooking or sprinkled 
over food to ensure a balance of the six tastes in each meal (see ‘churna’ recipes). Spices not only add 
flavour and aroma; they als o bring therapeutic value to the meal. They help boost natural immunity, and 
most of them boost the digestion so that the body is better able to absorb and assimilate the nutrients 
from the foods you eat.  
  
• Start the day with a stewed apple and raisins as this is light, warm and nourishing and breaks the fast of 
the night slowly.   The digestive system needs warm, nourishing foods in the morning to stimulate it, but 
not too much.   The digestive fire is just waking up, and will be at full capacity when the su n is high in 
the sky, at noon.  Heavier proteins and larger amounts of food are best digested later in the day. A 
stewed apple also helps your elimination system, because it is easy to digest and contains lots of fibre.   
It also contains vitamins, trace mi nerals, and antioxidants.   This is also a good recommendation for 
weight loss as anything that is light on the digestion , and adds nutrients rather than empty calories , 
helps burn body fat.  
 
 20 • It is important not to eat if there is no hunger/appetite present .  Often the feeling of ‘needing something’ 
to eat is really a need for liquid intake – try and listen to the body’s signals.  Often the body needs 
smaller, easily digestible soups and fruit/vegetable juices rather than a ‘full -blown’ meal, to gain energy 
and vitality.  
 
• Eat slowly and always chew your food well - many digestive enzymes are added from the salivary 
glands and these are stimulated by the action of the jaw.  Food that enters the stomach should be ‘soup 
like’ as the stomach has no teeth to do th is for you.  
 
• At the end of a meal it is beneficial to wait for five minutes before taking seconds or a desert as this 
gives the body time to register fullness and to indicate whether it requires more.  You should leave the 
table feeling light, refreshed a nd energetic.  It you feel heavy and tired after eating this is an indication 
that you have eaten too much or that the food you ate was nutritionally poor.  Allow five to ten minutes 
before leaving the table and then take a short walk for ten to fifteen mi nutes to aid the digestive process.  
 
• Food consumed should always be of the highest quality.  Fresh, organic food is best and all refined, 
processed food is best avoided.  Colour, taste and presentation are as important as nutritional content as 
the pleasur e we get from smelling, seeing and tasting food determines the abundance of enzymes 
necessary for proper digestion.  
 
• If raw foods are eaten these should be taken at the beginning of the meal and always in small quantities 
(less than one third of the total meal content).  Whilst raw food contains an abundance of vitamins and 
enzymes the body finds it harder to break these down than cooked food and this can lead to severe 
digestive problems, especially if the body is already under stress and the digestion is working less than 
optimally.  The best cooking method is to lightly steam vegetables  as this ensures minimal loss of 
enzymes and maximum retention of nutrients.  
 
• According to Ayurveda sweet, fruit deserts should be taken at the beginning of a meal rather t han at the 
end.  Sweet tastes satisfy hunger and quench the appetite and therefore reduce the need for large 
amounts of food.  Fruit that is left sitting behind the main meal waiting to be digested (up to six hours) 
can ferment and produce large amounts of  gas and bloating.  This destroys the ‘good’ digestive flora 
and encourages the production of ‘bad’ digestive flora/bacteria.  
 
• To properly digest a meal the stomach should be no more than a third full.  A third should contain food, 
a third the liquid you h ave been consuming before the meal and a third air or space.  This allows the 
digestive juices to fully break down the food contained there.  
 
• Another ayurvedic tip for digestion is to drink a fresh yogurt drink called Lassie either during or after 
the mea l. This drink consists of 1/4 cup fresh homemade yogurt, 1 cup room temperature water and 
sugar to taste. Blend it for one minute in the blender. Lassie is light and contains lactobacilli, necessary 
bacteria that lubricate the intestines to help digestion go smoothly. Lassie drinks help to reduce gas and 
bloating. They also taste delicious and can make a meal more satisfying and nutritious. See ‘lassie’ 
recipes.  
 
• Adequate intake of essential fatty acids (omega 3,6,9) will help reduce cholesterol, high blood  pressure, 
diabetes and obesity.  These can be found is fresh deep -sea fish such as mackerel, sardines and salmon 
and in many freshly -ground nuts and seeds.  However, the best way to ensure an adequate intake is by 
adding oil to your food.  Olive oil is go od but flax oil, pumpkin oil and borage oil are better.  Better still 
is a specially formulated blend called ‘Udo’s oil’ (see ‘Savant’ in the resources section) which contains 
all the essential fatty acids or omegas in their ideal ratios for optimum health  and nutrition.  
 
 21 • Fruits and vegetables contain lots of phyto -nutrients, and a variety of senses -pleasing colours, tastes and 
textures.  Ayurveda has always recommended eating lots of fruits and vegetables, not only for their 
nutritional value, but also bec ause they are natural internal cleansers.   Modern research concurs that 
fruits and vegetables are powerful disease -prevention foods - in fact, it is now recommended that you 
eat nine servings of antioxidant -rich fruits and vegetables a day to prevent cance r and other free radical 
induced diseases.  
 
• Eat naturally intelligent foods. Almost three -quarters of the products sold in supermarkets contain 
genetically modified ingredients and many of the chemicals and pesticides used in growing foods have 
been linked  to numerous diseases.   Processed foods, genetically modified foods, and foods to which 
additives or artificial preservatives have been added are no longer alive with the intelligence of nature.   
According to ayurveda, the human physiology is a reflection of the laws of the universe, and the more 
in tune our lives are with nature, the healthier we are likely to be.   Our digestive system is designed to 
process foods that are cl osest to nature - whole grains, pulses, fruits and vegetables.   Help your 
digestio n function optimally by choosing organic foods when ever possible - your health is worth the 
extra cost. 
 
• Cook your food correctly. The purpose of ayurvedic cooking is to combine the intelligence of the 
spices, the intelligence of vegetables and the intelli gence of the fat - all the different enzymes and 
energetics - in a way that is not confusing for your body's intelligence to break down and incorporate.  
Ayurvedic cooking methods are easy on the digestive system. You can prepare ayurvedic vegetables in 
one of two ways.   The first way is to steam the vegetables and then add the spices which have been 
sautéed in ghee, coconut oil or olive oil. The second way is to sauté the spices in ghee, coconut oil or 
olive oil and to then add the vegetables and sauté for  a few minutes.   Cover and cook at low 
temperature.   If you are making a curry (vegetables with sauce), add a small amount of water to finish 
cooking the vegetables  
 
• Give your digestive system a break. According to ayurveda, the build up of ama or toxins i n the  
physiology is the root cause of most disorders.   That's why ayurveda recommends internal cleansing at 
the change of each season for optimal health.   During internal cleansing, eat light yet nourishing foods 
such as mung bean soup or kicharee  and drin k lots of warm water or ‘Detox Tea’ through the day.   See 
‘teas’ in recipe section. Fresh, sweet juicy fruits are excellent cleansers. Periodic internal cleansing gets 
rid of accumulated junk from inside the body and boosts the digestion for the next seaso n. 
 
• Triphala is an excellent aid to elimination and purification and will help strengthen and purify the 
digestive/immune system. It is best taken in the late evening. A herbal paste called Chywanaprash is 
also excellent in this regard.  
 
• Water is essential  for good, digestion, ridding the body of toxins, maintaining immunity and healthy 
skin. When the water is herbalised it has an even stronger, more beneficial action.  
For kapha types: To a thermos of boiled water, add 2 thin slices of fresh ginger root, 2 basil leaves, 2 
whole cloves, 1/2 teaspoon of whole cumin seeds and 2 pinches licorice powder. Sip hot, during and 
after meals.  
For pitta types: 2 pinches of Indian sarsaparilla powder, 1/4 teaspoon cumin seeds, 2 pinches of licorice 
powder, 1/2 teaspoon fennel seeds and 1/2 teaspoon of coriander seeds. Drink at body temperature 
throughout the day, alternating with plain boiled water.  
For vata types: 1/2 teaspoon whole cumin seeds, 1/2 teaspoon whole coriander seeds, 1/2 teaspoon 
fennel seeds, 3 pinches o f ashwagandha root powder and 1 pinch whole root licorice powder. Drink 
wa r m.   
 
 
 22 • Exercise each day as your body craves routine.   If you exercise at fifty percent capacity at the same time 
every day, eat at the same time and sleep at the same time, your bod y will respond with better digestion, 
better sleep and overall better immunity. Yoga, walking, cycling, dancing and swimming are all 
excellent in this regard. The way to tell if you are exerting more than fifty percent capacity and starting 
to exceed your capacity is if sweat starts to form on your nose, forehead or under the arms.   Anothe r 
sign is if you can no longer breathe through the nose.   Breathing through the nose is recommended for 
ayurvedic exercise. If you start to need to gulp air through the mo uth, it's time to slow down or stop. If 
you follow this one guideline, you will always feel energized by exercise instead of exhausted.   E a ch  
day, you will find that your capacity increases and that you can exercise more intensely or for a longer 
duration.   Very naturally you will be able to handle more exercise without ever straining.  
 
• The practices of meditation, chanting and pranayama will also help balance the mind, subtly tone the 
body, improve digestion and massively reduce stress.  
  
• Retiring to bed e arly and waking early is necessary for the maintenance of hormone balance in the mind 
and body – this creates h appiness and a stress -free mind;  the prerequisite of proper digestion.  
 
• Better relationships are formed when the mind and body are in harmony. Th e beauty of Ayurveda is 
that it takes into account all areas of life.    While you may think that your problems with relationships 
start with the other person, the fact remains that you can change only yourself.    Most relationships go 
wrong when the people  involved start blaming each other.   If you stop and look within, you will surely 
find that blame doesn't always lie with the other person. At the basis of all relationships is the human 
heart.   The heart is the seat of Sadhaka Pitta, the sub -dosha of Pitt a concerned with emotions. To use 
modern terminology, Sadhaka Agni is related to the neuro -hormones that are located in the brain and all 
over the body, including the heart. The neuro -hormones located in the heart send signals to the brain to 
register depr ession or happiness, depending on how the individual processes an experience.  
 
It is important to understand and thereby respect the special psycho -emotional makeup of others.   
Rather than blame others for reacting differently than we do, it's better to de velop understanding and 
tolerance, based on the knowledge of Ayurvedic mind -body types. If you are feeling irritated with 
someone, it's best to look to your own physiology rather than blame h im o r he r.   Once we start to liv e 
more in harmony with nature we are naturally more tolerant and forgiving. Good digestion not only 
positively effects our physical health but our mental and emotional health as well but . This also works 
the other way round ; better relationships create better digestion, better health  and a happier  life. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 23 Other n utritional considerations  
 
 
Water  
Water is essential to life.  It has many healing properties and contributes up to 70% of our body weight.  It keeps 
the skin soft, supple and free of wrinkles, removes inorganic mineral depos its, flushes out toxins, prevents 
constipation, protects against viruses/infections and helps remove cholesterol and excess fat.  The type of water 
we drink today, and the insufficient amounts consumed, contribute to arteriosclerosis, illness and premature  
aging.  Unfortunately tap water often contains the residues or homeopathic concentrations of modern drugs and 
hormones which are not removed during the filtration process at sewage plants. It may also contain toxic 
chemicals such as chlorine and fluoride.  Even today’s naturally distilled water, rain, is often polluted by our 
industrial technology. Bottled water, water filters water purifiers, water coolers, water softeners, reverse osmosis 
systems and water distillers may help rectify this situation. Howev er, whilst distilled water contains only pure 
H2O - water that is free from harmful inorganic compounds, toxic chemicals, bacteria and viruses - the electricity 
and heat used to produce it may reduce it’s ‘life -energy’ or prana.  
 
We should ideally drink b etween 1 - 2 litres per day depending on our body -type. Just as we use hot water to 
soften and dissolve impurities and fat from our dishes, pots and pans so too should we use it to detoxify our 
body. Cold water hardens and congeals fat in our body whilst h ot water softens and dissolves fat. Cold water 
slows down our digestive capabilities and hinders digestion whilst hot water speeds up our metabolism and helps 
the digestive process. Body or room temperature water is relatively neutral and preferable to col d water 
consumption. Water combined with tea or coffee acts as a diuretic and should be followed by an equal amount of 
plain water to prevent dehydration. Adding a slice of lemon or ginger to our hot water can help the cleansing 
process and further improve  digestion.  
 
Table Salt  (sodium chloride)  
Table salt is subject to very high temperatures during the refining process which hardens the grains and allows 
them to flow more easily - it also renders them virtually insoluble in water and difficult for the bo dy to 
metabolise.  This can cause water -logging of our tissues, increased blood pressure and encrustation of the 
arteries, veins and capillaries.  We should therefore reduce the use of refined table salt and favour natural salts 
such as unrefined sea salt,  black or rock salt instead.  Kelp and other seaweeds are also excellent sources of 
organic sodium as are many vegetables; celery being especially good.  
 
Meat Products  
Meat is often high in saturated fats and cholesterol, both of which may contribute to cl ogging of the arteries.  It 
can also contain dangerous microbes such as salmonella and E.coli, as well as many residual antibiotics and 
steroids.  Red meat in particularly is very heating to the body and very difficult to digest. It is best to obtain our 
protein from grains, cereals, soya products, pulses, lentils, nuts and seeds. However, if meat forms a large part of 
your diet; eat organic, favour chicken and fish and ensure an adequate supply of fresh fruit, pure water and 
vegetables.  
 
Processing and Ref ining Foods  
These modern techniques reduce the nutritional value of foodstuffs by as much as 95%.  Many have sugar or salt 
added to improve taste or prolong shelf life, while others contain inorganic minerals, flavouring and synthetic 
additives.  The body cannot utilise these harmful substances and wastes a great deal of energy in its attempt to 
expel them from our body.  Consuming vast quantities of these products inevitably leads to ill health and 
premature aging as the body builds up toxic substances it has failed to eliminate.  
 
Carbohydrates, Oils and Fats  
These play an essential role in our body and are responsible for our energy levels, tissue repair, hormone 
production and vitamin assimilation.  Fast releasing carbohydrates such as refined white suga r are best avoided 
 24 while slow releasing carbohydrates found in whole -grains, fruit and vegetables are vital for proper cell -to-cell 
communication and tissue functioning.  Oils high in linoleic acid and/or alpha -linoleic acid are essential to the 
body.  Hem p, Flax, Pumpkin, Walnut, Udo’s and Soya bean oil are excellent with Sunflower, Safflower, 
Sesame, Rice Bran and Evening Primrose coming a close second.  Again, the refining and processing of these 
oils destroys their life -enhancing properties and renders them harmful to the body.  It is best to try and obtain 
organic, unrefined, cold -pressed oils whenever possible and to remember that only small quantities are required 
by the body each day for optimum health and vitality.  
 
Vitamins and minerals  
Whilst the body requires an abundant supply of vitamins and minerals it is generally accepted that the soil our 
food is grown in is no longer as effective in supplying these nutrients as it once was. Our soils are over -used and 
crop rotation has become a thing of the  past so nutrients are taken out but not returned.  
 
Non-organic produce is further disadvantaged by the fact that the pesticides, fungicides and insecticides, used to 
help increase production, prevent the plants from producing many of the nutrients in the  quantities that we 
require for good health. Fertilisers may be added to the soil but these again are mainly inorganic and do not 
possess the wide spectrum of minerals required for good health – if certain minerals are not put back into the soil 
the plant will no longer possess them in it’s make -up and we will therefore no longer have them in our diets.  
 
However, supplementing our diet with vitamin and mineral supplements may have limited effect and may even 
be detrimental to our health. Firstly, most suppl ements are inorganic and have been synthetically produced in a 
l a b o r a t o r y  – this means that they will lack the essential ‘life -energy’ that we only receive from ‘live’ plants and 
our body may have limited capacity to use the lifeless nutrients contained wi thin them. Many people have 
reported that some supplements they have taken come straight out the other end with the manufacturer’s details 
still visible on the tablet! Secondly, it is practically impossible to replicate nature and finding the right ‘blend’  of 
nutrients to ensure that they go to the right place in the right amounts and produce right effects is nigh on 
impossible too. Thirdly, we all have different body -types and therefore different vitamin/mineral requirements so 
no one pill will suit all pe ople. What may be beneficial for one person may be detrimental to the next and cause 
further toxicity in the body.  
 
The only way to really guarantee we ingest all the nutrients we need in their correct form, combination and 
quantity is to eat the correct f oods, ie; fresh, organic produce.  If we were to eat the recommended five servings 
of organic fruit, vegetables and grains per day and vary the type of produce we choose each day this would go 
most of the way towards ensuring better health. If we were also  to choose foods suitable for our body type this 
would help still further. If we were to increase the amount of fruit and vegetables we ate each day by 
supplementing our diet with freshly prepared vegetable juices, which are very easy to digest, we would b e eating 
as healthily as is possible is today’s world.  
 
Leafy Greens  
Dark leafy green vegetables such as collard greens, spinach, swiss chard, mustard greens, bok choy greens, 
sorrel, turnip greens and many varieties of kale are considered a particularly n utritious class of vegetables. They 
contain important minerals such as calcium, magnesium, iron, potassium, vitamin A, vitamin K, vitamin B1 and 
vitamin B2. Ayurveda recommends that we have some leafy greens each day to help meet the nutritional 
requiremen ts for optimal health.  
 
Leafy greens help replenish liquid in the body and refresh and purify the subtle channels called shrotas. They 
also supply prana or life energy that provides sustenance to mind and body. They help balance pitta and kapha. 
People who  need to balance vata should eat them  prepared with ghee or olive oil and vata balancing spices. They 
are very beneficial for people suffering from skin problems as they  are cooling, gently purifying and nourishing 
for the skin. Due to the high mineral content of calcium and vitamin A, leafy greens are highly beneficial for 
reproductive health and menopause. They contain antioxidants that help to prevent aging and disease . 
 
 25 There are different methods of cooking leafy greens. Some are tender and cook very quickly whilst others, such 
as kale, may need cooking longer. It is best to keep the leaf part whole when cooking. However, if there are 
tough stems, such as on collard g reens and kale, then it is best to slice the stem into bite size pieces. The tough 
stem should be cooked until tender or it may cause abdominal discomfort.  
 
Genetic engineering  
This technology involves inserting genetic material  from animals, insects, viru s’s and other organisms into the 
DNA of food products such as corn , soybeans, and tomatoes. From a n Ayurvedic perspective nature's innate 
organizing power or intelligence is woven into the DNA and determines the characteristics of different species. 
By spl icing foreign genetic material into the DNA of a plant, the plant's fundamental connection with the 
wholeness of life is damaged. This damage gets passed on to us at the dinner table.  
 
The ayurvedic texts define the source of all disease and suffering as pragyaparadh, or "the mistake of the 
intellect." This occurs when individuals (or even single cells) "forget" their connections with the wholeness of 
life and believe themselves to be isolated entities. Creating, and then eating, genetically engineered foo ds 
exposes us to pragyaparadh.  
 
We are all threads  in the fabric of creation, say  ancient ayurvedic texts. To believe ourselves to be the weavers, 
capable of successfully manipulating nature's intelligence, is a symptom of pragyaparadh and this assumption 
reveals our ultimate naiveté. The genetic program of a living organism is vastly more powerful and more 
complex than limited human intelligence.  
 
Therefore, consuming genetically food exposes us to unknown forces that may seriously damage the fine tuning 
and functioning of our physiology and cause long -tem chronic health problems.  
 
The adverse effects of eating microwaved f ood 
Microwave cooking is one of the most important causes of ill health but has largely been ignored by the 
public due to its speed and convenience . Russian research concerning adverse neurological effects of altered 
magnetic states of microwaved foods caused the Russian government to outlaw all food microwave apparatus in 
1976 (this law was unfortunately lifted after Perestroika).  
 
Anothe r study reported in the US journal Paediatrics (vol. 89, no. 4, April 1992) showed depletion of antibodies 
and breakdown of enzymes when breast milk is microwaved.  The US Food and Drug Association also found a 
problem with the release of potentially toxic molecules into the food from packaging designed to help brown 
food during microwaving.  
 
Microwaves also tend to heat foods unevenly, indicating that some of the food is not sufficiently heated to kill 
all the bacteria or parasites that might be present. Th is uneven heating also creates hot spots in food that may 
release synthetic oestrogens found in certain plastics.   But even when using only glass (Pyrex) containers, low 
levels of radiation escaping from the ovens may be harmful.   
 
Two researchers, Dr. Ber nard H. Blanc and Dr. Hans Hertel, confirmed that microwave cooking significantly  
changes food nutrients and has a detrimental effect on the human body. Their research revealed the following 
about microwaved food:  
 
• The body cannot recognise and consequentl y not metabolize radiolytic by products (isomers) created in 
microwaved food. These by -products accumulate in the body.  
• Male and female hormone production is altered by continually eating microwaved food.  
• Minerals, vitamins and nutrients are quantitatively  reduced and qualitatively altered, so that the body 
gets little or no benefit, and absorbs these altered compounds that cannot be broken down.  
 26 • The minerals in vegetables are altered into cancerous free -radicals.  
• Microwaved food causes stomach and intestin al tumours as well as cancerous cells in the blood.  
• The prolonged eating of microwaved food causes increase of low -density lipoprotein cholesterol.  
• Continually eating food processed in a microwave oven gradually causes brain damage by de -polarising 
or de -magnetising brain tissue.  
• Continual ingestion of microwaved food causes immune system deficiencies through lymph gland and 
blood serum alterations (increase of white and decrease of red blood cells).  
• Eating microwaved food causes loss of memory and concent ration, emotional instability and a decrease of 
intelligence.  
 
Microwaved blood kills patient  
In 1991, there was a lawsuit in Oklahoma concerning the hospital use of a microwave oven to warm blood 
needed in a transfusion. The case involved a hip surgery pa tient, Norma Levitt, who died from a simple blood 
transfusion. It seems the nurse had warmed the blood in a microwave oven. This tragedy makes it very apparent 
that there's much more to "heating" with microwaves than we've been led to believe. Blood for tr ansfusions is 
routinely warmed, but not in microwave ovens. In the case of Mrs. Levitt, the microwaving altered the blood and 
it killed her.  It's very obvious that this form of microwave radiation "heating" does something to the substances it 
heats. It's a lso becoming quite apparent that people who process food in a microwave oven are also ingesting 
these "unknowns".  Because the body is electrochemical in nature, any force that disrupts or changes human 
electrochemical events will affect the physiology of t he body.  
  
Also, from an Ayurvedic perspective, food cooked in this unnatural way lacks prana or ‘life -energy’ and has 
little usefulness as part of a healthy balanced diet. However, whichever way you look at it, there appears to be 
very serious concerns r egarding the safety of eating food cooked in micro -waved ovens and therefore subject to 
high frequency, alternating current electromagnetic waves . Should you be the owner of such a dangerous gadget 
we recommend that you give it to the nice men at the recyc ling centre  and don't just give it to someone else!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27 Summary of h ealthy dietary principles  
 - all body -types  - 
 
 
• Eat only when you are hungry (sometimes only a drink is required to satisfy a craving).  
• Eat breakfast to help prevent a m id-morning energy slump (especially Vata types).  
• Drink a glass of fresh, organic fruit/vegetable juice each day (esp; carrot, apple and spinach).  
• Don’t mix fruit and vegetables juices apart from carrot and apple.  
• Eat the largest meal at mid -day – this is w hen the digestive fire is at  its strongest.  
• Take ‘Ginger Pickle’ (see recipe section) half an hour before each meal.  
• Sit down whilst eating and  put your full attention on the food being eaten - do not divide the mind and 
weaken the digestive juices by exce ssive talking, reading or watching television. Always be conscious 
of the taste of food  and the act of eating and try and e at in a settled, peaceful environment.  
• Eat only food that is attractive, wholesome, aromatic and tasty - this ensures proper digestio n. 
• Eat fresh, organic food whenever possible and always avoid processed and refined products.  
• Try to avoid lifeless, nutrient -poor food such as micro -waved, pre -cooked, left -over or canned.  
• Favour unprocessed, unrefined oils such as Udo’s, flax, pumpkin, g hee and olive oil.  
• Use honey, maple syrup, fructose, algarve and stevia extract for sweetening.  
• Reduce the use of refined sugar, salt, white flour, hard cheese and processed  or micro-waved food.  
• Ttry and avoid tea, coffee, alcohol, pastries and meat. If yo u do eat meat try and choose white meat or 
fish in preference to red meat as they are easier to digest.  
• Use soya, rice, almond, hazelnut or oat milk as a substitute for pasteurised cow’s milk.  
• Sip hot water during a meal but refrain from taking any liquids  for up to half an hour before and after 
food. This ensures that the stomach’s digestive enzymes do not become diluted.  
• Drink one to two litres of mineral/distilled water or herbal teas daily.  Ginger, lemon, peppermint, 
fennel, coriander and the digestive  teas (see recipe section) are good.  
• Drink hot water with fresh lemon or fresh ginger to reduce weight and/or eliminate toxins/impurities.  
• Eat fruit separately from main meals to prevent fermentation in the gut.  
• If you are a Pitta type, or even a Kapha typ e with good digestion, you can include a small salad and 
dressing before your main mid -day meal in the summertime.  
• Always chew your food thoroughly – this stimulates the salivary glands and also ensures food reaches 
the stomach in a pre -digested, liquid fo rm that is easier to digest and assimilate.  
• Avoid over -eating – rest and relax for a few minutes before taking a second helping.  
• The amount of chewed food that will fit into your cupped hands is equal to the size of a third of your 
stomach. Your digestion system works at its best when your stomach contains one third food, one third 
liquid and one third space at the end of a main meal.  
• Leave the table feeling sated but not heavy and bloated – energy levels should feel replenished.  
• Take a short stroll after a  large meal, and then a short rest afterwards if desired  
• If you are a Vata type and experience flagging energy during late afternoon, stop and have a small 
snack or fruit juice.  
• Eat at least three hours before bed and only have a light meal of cereal, toas t or soup.  
• Vata types benefit from milky bedtime drink with added ghee, cinnamon, nutmeg and raisins.  
• Aloe vera juice is good for everyone but it is especially beneficial for those suffering from pitta 
imbalances. It is good for digestion , cleansing  and el imination . Take about 30mls of the juice each day.  
• Turmeric  is both bitter and astringent and is a blood purifier and antioxidant. One teaspoon cooked with 
your meals is an excellent way to increase antioxidant intake. Vata people should use half this amount 
as it is can sometimes be too drying and depleting for them.  
 
 28 The day starts the night before.  
 
 
 
 
An early night ensures deep, refreshing sleep.  
Deep, refreshing sleep ensures one wakes early - rested and revitalised.  
Waking early - rested and revitalised - ensures time for massage, yoga and meditation.  
Massage, yoga and meditation ensure the mind and body are awake and alive.  
 
Mind and body - fully awake and alive - ensure a happy countenance.  
A happy countenance ensures a stress -free mind.  
A stress -free mind creates a positive mind.  
A stress -free, positive mind imparts love and peace to those around.  
 
An atmosphere of love and peace creates a wave of harmony throughout the room.  
A wave of harmony throughout the room creates a wave of harmony throughout the house.  
A wave of harmony throughout the house creates a wave of harmony throughout the city.  
A wave of harmony throughout the city creates a wave of harmony throughout  the country.  
A wave of harmony throughout the country creates a wave of harmony throughout the world.  
 
The peace and harmony of every individual in every town, in every city, in every country is in your power and 
their happiness rests in your arms.  If yo u are fully awake in the present moment, having learnt from and let go 
of the past, the future will take care of itself.  You simply need to bathe in the joy of being fully alive in every 
present waking moment . 
 
And the real beauty is – you can start today . 
 
 
 
 
 29 Chapter 2  
Daily r outines,  exercise & y oga 
~ how to stay fit & supple  & delay the process of aging ~  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whenever the wavering and unsteady heart wanders away,  
then so often let him subdue it and bring it back to the control of the soul;  
For sup reme happiness comes to the yogi whose heart is at rest,  
in whom passion is tranquilised, who is one with Brahma, and free from sin.  
The Yogi thus uniting his soul, who has ceased from sin,  
enjoys easily the boundless happiness of union with Brahma.  
~ Bhag avad Gita ~  
(Ch6:v26-29) 
 
 
 
 

 30 Dinacharya  
- living in harmony with nature’s rhythms - 
 
Dinacharya, the Sanskrit word for daily routine, is a simple and effective way to balance the body. Our daily 
activities have a profound effect on our health and a routin e, practiced daily, is stronger medicine than an 
occasional remedy. Dinacharya establishes healthful habits through attunement of the body to the natural cycles 
of the day. The three doshas, vata, pitta and kapha, each have their own periods of time within  a twenty -four 
hour day in which their energies predominate. By establishing a routine that “goes with the flow ” of these 
elemental energies, we are able to more easily support the body ’s natural rhythms and healing potential.  
 
Waking  
The f irst Vata peri od of the day ends around dawn with the first rays of sunlight.  At this time of day Vata 
qualities are at their strongest and if we arise between 4 –6am we will imbibe the positive qualities of alertness, 
vibrancy, enthusiasm, energy, clarity, strengthened  intuition and motivation. It is the most sattvic, peaceful, and 
still time of day and is an ideal time for spiritual practice. If there are time constraints we can simply take a few 
deep breaths and adopt an attitude of gratitude for waking up to an excit ing new day.  
 
Elimination  
Our bladder and colon should be emptied upon rising. To facilitate this practice we can drink a glass or two of 
warm water with a slice of lemon added. This helps rehydrate the tissues, flush toxins that have accumulated 
overnight , enkindles agni or digestive fire and stimulates peristalsis.  
 
Cleansing the senses  
Ayurveda recommends purifying the senses each day in preparation for taking in all the rich, new experiences 
that life has to offer. Refresh and energise the mind by splas hing the face and eyes with cool or luke -wa r m  wa t er . 
Gently wash the ears and apply a thin coat of sesame oil to the inside of the ear with your little finger. Use a neti 
pot with saline solution to cleanse the nasal passages. Brush the teeth. Scrape the t ongue using a tongue cleaner 
to remove any coating. Notice your tongue each morning. A thick coating is indicative of ama, or toxins in the 
digestive tract. Scraping the tongue helps to purify your sense of taste and benefits the internal organs. Finally, 
gargle with warm water, or salt water and turmeric to help purify and strengthen the voice and keep the gums, 
mouth and throat healthy.  
 
Abh yanga  
According to Ayurveda, abhyanga, or oil massage is an essential component of dinacharya. This practice 
nourish es and strengthens the body, encourages regular sleep patterns, stimulates internal organs, enhances blood 
circulation and can significantly reduce vata.  
 
Bath e  
After you have massaged your entire body, enjoy a warm bath or shower using a minimal amount of  mild soap. 
Towel dry with a towel you do not mind collecting oil with.  
 
Clothing  
Always wear clean clothing, preferably made from natural fibres such as cotton, wool, linen or silk. Ayurveda 
discourages wearing used clothing , particularly other peoples’ s hoes, because of the polluted subtle energies 
which they collect.  
 
Take your herbs  
Taking herbs at the same time each day will enhance their medicinal effect. Herbs taken on an empty stomach 
have the most potent action in the body.  
 
 31 Mild exercise  
Daily exe rcise increases circulation and oxygenation of the tissues, strengthens agni, tones the body, reduces fat 
and enhances vitality. Determine the best time to exercise and what form of exercise to practice with 
consideration to your prakriti (constitutional t ype) and the effects of the seasons. For example, in the fall, a vata 
person should exercise during the kapha time of day, to take advantage of kapha’s grounding and stable qualities. 
Choose an activity that is soothing to the nervous system like yoga or t ai chi.  
 
Meditation  
Just as we cleanse our bodies each day, we must also cleanse our minds of accumulated thoughts that no longer 
serve us. Be still. Direct your attention inward. Notice your breath. Practice pranayama. Meditate for twenty 
minutes or simpl y invite calm and relaxation into the body if time is limited. This practice acts as a protective 
shield to the destabilizing influences of the external environment.  
 
Aerobic exercise  
The next morning period is Kapha which has the qualities of heaviness, s lowness and stability – the later a 
person awakes after dawn the more of these qualities he imbibes within his physiology and carries with him for 
the rest of the day. Kapha time (especially between 7am and 10am) is the best time for more physical exercise , 
such as jogging, swimming or cycling.  
 
Work and lunch  
10am to 2pm, when pitta predominates, is the most productive time for work, especially for problem solving or 
completing tasks that requires your full attention and focus.  It is also the time when the  sun is at its peak and 
when the digestive fire or agni is at its strongest.  It is therefore the ideal time to eat the largest meal of the day. 
Eating at this time will allow efficient and maximum digestion, assimilation and metabolism.  Proper absorption  
of minerals, vitamins, proteins and carbohydrates will result in efficient energy production and feelings of 
strength and alertness.  It follows that there will also be less desire for snacking and overeating if the diet 
contains adequate nutrition and th e ability to properly assimilate it. A short, leisurely stroll shortly after lunch 
will also aid digestion.  
 
Creative work  
Vata comes around again during the afternoon.  This is a good time for mental agility and creative work.  Vata 
types may experience a  drop in energy at this time and a small snack is valuable for them.  
 
Evening meal  
Only light meals should be eaten in the evenings (toast, rice, semolina, milk drinks, noodles, soup etc). It is 
important to have allow ed enough time for your previous meal to have been digest ed thoroughly  (generally 4 
hours)  but should ideally  be taken before sundown and at least three hours before bedtime.  
 
Relaxation  
The next Kapha period begins in the early evening.  The heavy, slow, stable qualities of this dosha increas e as 
the evening progresses and reach their peak a couple of hours before midnight.  In order to imbibe these qualities 
and ensure a sound, heavy, undisturbed and restful sleep one should be in bed before this period ends.  Evening 
is a kapha energy period  and is a time to relax, engage in pleasant conversation with family or friends, read light 
novels or play gentle, soothing music. It is a time to unwind from the stimulation and activity of the day. About 
half an hour before bedtime is the perfect time to  take Triphala tea to gentle tone and balance to the digestive 
tract.  
 
Bathing  
Ayurveda sees bathing as a therapeutic activity  and the e vening is a good time to partake in this therapy . A 
leisurely bath relaxes tense muscles, irons out a creased brow, open s clogged pores, restores moisture to the 
tissues, and adds a healing dimension to your day. It enhances physical energy levels and improves mental 
 32 clarity. It helps remove sweat, dirt and environmental toxins from the skin. It helps relax the mind and bal ance 
the emotions.  
 
Ideally b egin with a full -body warm oil massage. Then bathe, using water that is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Apply a cleanser to your skin gently. Do not bathe in a hurry. Take your time and try to relax so that both mind 
and body ben efit from the bath. Use gentle aromatherapy oils such as lavender, sandalwood,  patchouli  or orange 
(do not use harsh or artificial fragrances that strip moisture from the skin  and damage the delicate wisdom that 
facilitates the reflection of the inner glow , called prabha in ayurveda). The a ncient ayurvedic texts also 
recommend adding rose petals, milk, honey, and turmeric  to your bath . After you towel off, spritz your body 
with rose water.  
 
Sleep  
Finally, the next active Pitta period runs from 10pm until a bout 2am.  If one is not asleep during this period the 
body begins to wake up and one attains a second wind around 11pm,  which may have you up until 1am!   Sleep is 
then impaired and the elimination of impurities and toxins within the body suffers greatly. Being in bed by 10pm 
will ensure 6 -7 hours of refreshing, detoxifying sleep that will leave you revitalised and re -energised . It is a good 
practice to apply oil to the scalp and the soles of the feet before bed to calm the nervous system and promote 
sound sleep.  
 
This Pitta period is also a second ‘digestive phase’ but it is not intended for digesting large quantities of food or 
heavy foodstuffs. The metabolism work differently than at midday and is far less efficient in terms of breaking 
down the contents  of the stomach and intestines. It will try to digest them as well as possible but usually leaves 
the process incomplete leading to a further build up of undigested food or ‘Ama’ (hence the very furry, white 
tongue in the morning after a late night of alco hol and heavy food). This is why the evening meal should be light 
and easily digestible.  
 
Following dinacharya is a way to bring more awareness to all of the habits and choices we make throughout the 
day. Conscious awareness in our daily lives enables us t o be whole and healthy beings, bringing us closer to our 
true selves. Living in harmony with the cycles of nature is not only the path to health, but to true freedom.  
 
 
Seasonal Rhythms  
As the day goes through a cycle of Vata, Pitta and Kapha so does the y ear.  
 
The qualities of Vata are cold and moving (wind) and these qualities are prevalent in the winter.  Vata -types 
especially must try to follow a Vata pacifying routine and diet at this time  of year  to prevent Vata dosha f r o m  
drifting out of balance. Wh en  t h e cool, dry winds begin to blow  it can sometimes be difficult to maintain a 
peaceful, grounded state of being. Having a routine to follow restores balance throughout the day, everyday, 
safeguarding against the anxiety and stress associated with increa sed vata.  
 
Summer is hot, just like Pitta dosha, and those prone to Pitta -type imbalances should keep cool and follow a Pitta 
pacifying routine and diet.  
 
Spring (and to some extent autumn) can be cold and damp exhibiting the qualities of Kapha.  Kapha -t y pes 
should follow a Kapha pacifying diet and routine to keep their bodies in balance and free from the usual 
complaints of flu, cold and blocked sinuses.  
 33 Natures natural cycles  
 
 
 
Times of the day  
 
Noon/Midnight  
 
P 
 
 
9PM/AM        3PM/AM  
 
 
 
 
 
Sunrise/Su nset 
 
 
 
 
 
Seasons of the year  
 
 
Summer  
 
P 
 
 
 
Spring        Winter  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PITTA  
 
 
 
KAPHA      VATA  
PITTA  
 
 
 
KAPHA       VATA  
 34  The ideal daily routine  summary  
(Following this routine ensures a smooth, harmonious, energetic, stress -free day)  
 
 
 
 
Morning  (Kapha period)  
 
• Arise around dawn (end of vata pe riod)  
• Drink hot water and evacuate bladder/bowels  
• Clean teeth/scrape tongue  
• Oil massage  
• Exercise (esp. Kapha -types)  
• Warm or cool shower  
• Sun-salute & yoga asanas  
• Pranayama – breathing exercise  
• Meditation  
• Breakfast  
 
Midday  (Pitta period)  
• Lunch – largest mea l of day  
• Short walk  
• Brief rest  
 
Afternoon  (Vata period)  
• Good for creative work  
• Light snack for Vata -types  
 
Evening  (Kapha period)  
• Yoga asanas  
• Pranayama  
• Meditation  
• Light supper  
• Relaxing activity  
• Early to bed (Kapha time)  
 
Night (pitta/vata period)  
• Sleep  
 
 35 Abhyanga oil massage  
 
 
Abhyanga is the anointing of the body with warm, medicated oil. For thousands of years, people have used 
abhyanga to improve sleep , calm the nervous system  and increase longevity. Abhyanga helps the skin release 
toxins and also facilitates the trans -dermal absorption of nutrients and healing properties from the herbs and oils 
used in massage . It is used as a medicine for certain disorders.  
 
There are seven layers of tissue in the body (called dhatus)  and ea ch successive layer is more  concentrated and 
life-giving. For oil to reach the deepest layer s it must be massaged into the body for about fifteen -minutes. The 
benefits of Abh yanga as outlined in  the Vedic texts ( Charaka Samhita, Sushru ta Samhita and Ashtanga 
Hrdayam ) are as follows:  
 
• Recharges and rejuvenates mind and body . 
• Delays the aging process and promotes longevity . 
• Produces greater vitality, energy, stamina and physical endurance . 
• Lubricates the joints and promotes flexibility.  
• Increase muscle strength and firmness . 
• Nourishes,  tones and purifies the skin . 
• Enhances complexion and lustre of skin (more radiant/ attractive, softer/smoother) . 
• Stimulate s the circulation and prevents impurities from accumulating in the body resulting in greater 
resistance to illness and faster recover y from trauma, injury or disease . 
• Pacifies the doshas (especially vata & pitta) . 
• Dissolves accumulated stress or toxins from the mind and body (stress causes skin to age prematurely) . 
• Increases mental alertness . 
• Calms the nerves and balances mind and emoti ons. 
• Improves elimination of impurities from the body . 
• Allows more refreshing, deeper sleep . 
• Reduce s bacterial infections . 
• Nourishes the seven different types of body tissue and the seven layers of the skin . 
• Applying oil to the scalp makes t h e hair grow lu xuriantly, thick, soft and glossy; it also soothes and 
invigorates the sense organs and removes facial wrinkles.  
• Applying oil to the ears rectifies disorders of the ear which are due to increased vata ; it also improves 
stiffness in the neck and jaw.  
• Applyi ng oil to the feet alleviates stiffness, roughness and  fatigue whilst also strengthening and firming 
them. It also enhances vision, pacifies vata, reduces sciatica symptoms and tones local veins and 
ligaments.  
 
Self-massage is ideally undertaken each morni ng but early evenings are also very effective.  Try to avoid 
massaging immediately after a large meal so as not to interfere with digestion.  
 
Sesame oil is the best oil to use on the body while coconut oil (good for delaying greying and receding of hair) i s 
best used on the head and face. The ripening process detailed below enhances the healing/medicinal properties of 
sesame oil:  
 
How to cure  your o il for maximum therapeutic results:  
Place the required quantity of oil into a heavy bottomed saucepan and heat  on medium setting until the oil has 
reached 100 degrees centigrade (use a liquid thermometer to gauge this).  Alternatively, if you don’t have a 
thermometer, simply add one or two drops of water to the oil before heating.  Always use a medium heat and 
never leave the room while oil is heating, as it is highly inflammable.  
 36 As the oil heats a crackling sound is heard - this is the water boiling off.  When the crackling stops the oil has 
reached the correct temperature.  Allow the oil to cool.  It is now rip ened and can be stored in a suitable 
container for up to one month.  Re -ripen if stored for longer.  
 
How to carry out your own Ayurvedic oil m assage : 
Carry out your daily oil massage in a warm, comfortable room and heat the oil to body temperature before 
applying to the body (either place a small amount of oil in a small stainless steel bowl and warm over a candle 
burner or place the glass/plastic oil container in a bowl of hot water for a few minutes before use).  
 
Start by using coconut oil on the face an d scalp, paying particular attention to the ears.  Slow, gentle strokes are 
preferable.  Sesame oil is used for the rest of the body.  Start with the arms, paying particular attention to the 
hands and fingers.  Next massage the front of the body with slow,  gentle strokes over the abdomen.  The back is 
somewhat more awkward but do what you can reach – use the backs of your hands to cover more area.  Massage 
the buttocks and legs finishing with the feet (give a little extra time and attention here).  
 
A s  a  r u l e, circular massage strokes are used over joints and long sweeping movements along the arm/leg bones.  
Five or ten circles/long strokes per area should be given depending on the time available.  For even greater 
therapeutic effects a few drops of essential  oil may be added to your massage oil.  We recommend no more than 
10 drops of lavender, cederwood, sandalwood, patchouli, ylang ylang or frankincense per 100ml of massage oil.  
 
It is beneficial to keep the oil on the skin for at least twenty minutes before  showering.  Water should be warm 
rather than hot and soap should be used sparingly to allow a residue of oil to remain on the skin.  
 
Sesame oil’s highly medicinal, therapeutic effects are probably due to its high linoleic content which has anti -
bacterial , anti -inflammatory, anti -carcinogenic and antioxidant properties.  However, if you find sesame oil too 
heating coconut oil, olive oil or sunflower can applied instead.  
 
“The body of one who uses oil massage regularly does not become affected much even if subjected to accidental 
injuries, or strenuous work. By using oil massage daily, a person is endowed with pleasant touch, trimmed body 
parts and becomes strong, charming and least affected by old age.”  
Charaka Samhita Vol. 1, V: 88 -89 
 37 Daily massage plan  
 
 
The ideal early morning (5 -6am) routine includes:  
• Drinking hot water  
• Emptying bowels/bladder  
• Cleaning teeth/scraping tongue  
• Skin brushing (upward strokes)  
• Massaging the body with sesame oil and the head with coconut oil (can be after shower/bath)  
• Taking a shower/bath (with warm water and a vegetable -based soap)  
 
However, if time is limited or you’d like some variation on this routine a massage plan that runs over the course 
of one week is suggested below.  This can be adapted to your needs and varied each  week.  Massaging after your 
bath or shower is also acceptable if it is more convenient or preferable.  If you massage after your shower make 
sure you use a special towel to take off excess oil. This towel will need to be boil -washed to remove all the oil.  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Monday  
• Sh ower  
• Skin brush  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Tuesday  
• Massage body with sesame oil and head with coconut oil  
• Bath with essential oil (lavender, sandalwood or ylang ylang)  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Wednesday  
• Massage head with coconut oil and feet with sesame oil  
• Sh ower  
• Skin brush  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Thursday  
• Massage body with sesame oil and head with coconut oil  
• Sh ower  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Friday  
• Bath with essential oil (lavender, sandalwood or ylang ylang)  
• Skin brush  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teet h/scrape tongue  Saturday  
• Massage body with sesame oil and head with coconut oil  
• Sh ower  
 
• Drink hot water, empty bowels/bladder, clean teeth/scrape tongue  Sunday  
• Skin brush  
• Massage body with sesame oil and head with coconut oil  
• Sh ower  
 
You may also gargle and massage inside of nostrils with sesame oil as this helps combat colds/flu and other 
viral/bacterial infections.  Please note:  Tongue scraping should be done with a steel, silver or gold tongue -
scraper – four or five runs gently over the tongue should be enough to remove any ama (undigested 
food/bacteria).  This procedure helps improve digestion, freshens the breath and removes impurities from the 
body.  
 38 So-hum meditation  
 
 
 
The mind naturally and effortlessly transcends everyday worries and concerns wh en it is given the opportunity 
but with the hectic lives we lead today this rarely happens.  Perhaps in odd moments, while we’re taking a break 
in a quiet park or have witnessed a beautiful sunset, a momentary peace and calmness suddenly descends, 
leaving us feeling refreshed and alert; bathed in a bubble of stillness and silence.  This fleeting occurrence takes 
us by surprise but reminds us of the joy of life and the possibilities it could hold if only we could learn to enjoy 
it. 
 
What does not seem to be widely known is that this state is easily and effortlessly achieved through a few 
minutes’ practice of an amazingly simple but effective technique known as meditation.  It can be taught in a few 
minutes, can be practiced by anyone and will work anywhere.  
 
With the help of a subtle sound or mantra the mind can effortlessly transcend to this silent state of heightened 
awareness and rest within minutes.  What’s more, the practice of this very simple technique helps build a solid 
foundation for the mind, allowi ng it to effortlessly remain calm in the most stressful and demanding situations.  
Meditation allows the mind to see more clearly and work more efficiently and effectively for prolonged periods 
of time without becoming unduly tired or strained.  Thus we ca n truly “do less and accomplish more”.  
 
It’s our birthright to enjoy a healthy, stress -free life and this can be achieved by allowing the mind to rest and 
recharge at regular intervals with a few minutes meditation; a technique which produces levels of res t and 
relaxation many times more effective than sleep.  
 
Progressively, over the centuries, this natural mind -relaxing procedure has been complicated, mystified and 
watered down.  By many it is seen as a battle to conquer the mind and senses and thus best l eft to the spiritual 
aspirant who has the time and will to perfect his/her technique.  Meditation should be neither a process of deep 
concentration nor one of intense contemplation – it is simply an effortless way of allowing the mind to transcend 
to deep levels of relaxation very quickly, easily and effortlessly.  
 
Meditation is simply a matter of being taught how to use specific internal sounds correctly so that they act as 
vehicles for the mind to experience progressively more subtle values of those sound s.  Eventually, one 
effortlessly reaches the silent field of all possibilities where thoughts, words or sounds originate.  
 
The practice described here involves simply sitting quietly in a calm and peaceful environment and observing the 
gentle inflow and ou tflow of ones breath. This quickly relaxes the mind and harmonises the nervous system.  
However, this is only achieved if one’s thoughts are allowed to flow unhindered with no judgment or forcing 
away of thoughts.  Thoughts cannot be stopped and all attemp ts at trying to do so will produce strain – just pay 
no attention to them and let them go.  
 39 Vedic M editation instructions  
 
 
• Allow yourself 15 -20 minutes of undisturbed silence in a calm, peaceful environment.  
• Start by sitting comfortably and relaxing with the eyes closed for a few minutes.  
• Have the intention to meditate – this means putting aside any ideas of using the time allocated to simply 
rest, sleep  or mull things over.  
• Now slowly, innocently and effortlessly become aware of your breath.  
• Notice the ge ntle sound of ‘so’ on each in breath and the sound of ‘hum’ on each out breath.  
• Do not deliberately mentally repeat the sound – just allow it to be there in your awareness – it should 
almost seem  to repeat itself - just observe it and allow it to become na turally independent of the breath - 
allow it to become fainter and fainter, quieter and quieter, more and more distant until it almost fades 
away. Allow it to eventually fade away.  
• As it fades away the mind settles down, relaxes and occasionally transcends  – often stresses are released 
as this happens. Stresses are released on the back of thoughts – thus, as you release stress you will have 
thoughts. The more powerful the stress being released the more powerful and absorbing the thoughts will 
be that surfac e in your awareness.  
• As soon as you become aware of thoughts other than the mantra (‘so-hum’)  gently ‘favour’ the mantra 
again – i.e, gently, innocently and effortlessly go back to witnessing the mantra.  The bigger the stress 
being released the more your mind will present you with thoughts – just innocently and effortlessly let 
them go rather than staying with them and turn your awareness back towards the mantra  (so – hum) 
instead . 
• It is important to realise that it is rare to meditate without lots of thou ghts also being present.  This is a 
sign of correct meditation.  Meditation releases stress – hence thoughts will frequently arise.  
• Meditation is only experienced as ‘difficult’ or ‘boring’ when we start straining to ‘hold’ the mantra in our 
awareness and ‘try’ to ‘focus’ or ‘concentrate’ on keeping the mantra present in our mind and ‘keeping’ or 
‘forcing’ other thoughts out. Thoughts are part of meditation – thoughts are good – thoughts are stresses 
disappearing forever.  
• Meditation is not about concentrat ing, focusing, contemplating or forcing the mind. Meditation is about 
gently, innocently and effortlessly ‘favouring’ a sound (mantra) – it is about quietly witnessing and 
allowing thoughts to flow unhindered and then effortlessly coming back to the sound (mantra) when other 
thoughts have taken its place.  
• After 15 -20 minutes stop ‘favouring’ the mantra and sit quietly with the eyes still closed for 2 -3 minutes.  
This allows the mind and body to fully integrate and process the experience to gain maximum bene fits. 
• If there have been many thoughts during the meditation, rest for longer (up to ten minutes) as it is a sign 
that you have released lots of stresses and need longer to integrate the experience.  
• Practice for 15 -20 minutes twice a day. Dawn and dusk are  the best times as the mind and body are more 
alert and relaxed. Avoid practicing immediately after a large meal or before bedtime (it wake s you up !). 
• Try and practice at the same times each day  so that the mind already comes prepared. Have the intention 
to meditate and then allow a few minutes for the mantra to appear of its own accord – if it doesn’t 
spontaneously appear then quietly and innocently introduce it as a ‘vague’, distant idea. It may or may not 
follow the breath and it is unimportant whether i t does or not – some people find it easier if it does and 
some don’t. Don’t worry about how often the sound disappears and other thought s arise; just simply bring 
the mantra  back again as quietly as possible.  
 
 40 Pranayama  
 
 
 
Through t he practice of pranayam a (a controlled breathing exercise ) we bring  conscious awareness to the breath, 
uniting mind and body in a present moment experience. Through this awareness , and with a little practice, we 
learn how to access our inner wisdom and increase our Prana, the om nipresent life force, that determines the 
amount of energy, clarity and joy  we have in our lives.  
 
Pranayama is best practiced in the early morning when the mind is clear and free from the experiences of the 
day. Also, practiced after yoga asana, it can be  the perfect transition into meditation. This is also a useful and 
simple tool to bring us into balance before an exam, meeting or presentation. Just a few minutes can bring us 
back to our centre, easing anxiety and nervous tension.  
 
Alternate Nostril Brea thing (Vata Pranayama):  Nadi Shodhana, or alternate nostril breathing, is a type of 
pranayama that balances the right and left hemispheres of the brain and has a calming effect on the nervous 
system while creating a more alert mind. It cleanses the channe ls of the subtle energy body by removing 
energetic blockages along the nadis (channels) that correspond to the nerve ganglia on either side of the spinal 
cord. It is extremely centering, making it one of the best practices for vata dosha.  
 
Begin by sitting  comfortably on a cushion, folded blanket or in a chair, keeping the head and spine upright. 
Bring awareness to your breathing process, noticing the quality and length of each inhalation and exhalation. 
Br eath e  deep into your abdomen  and keep the body rela xed. 
 
Position the right hand (you may choose to alternate with each practice) in vishnu mudra by folding the index 
finger and third finger inwards to lightly touch at the base of the thumb. Your little finger rests by the side of the 
ring finger. You will  alternately use your thumb to close your right nostril and your ring and little fingers, 
working as one, to close your left. Rest your left hand comfortably in your lap. The breath should never feel 
forced.  
 
Instructions:  Breathe in gently  keeping the b reath relaxed, subtle and light .  Block the right nostril with 
the thumb of the right hand and breathe out through the left nostril.  Breathe in gently through the left nostril and 
then block the left nostril with the fourth finger and breathe out through the right nostril.  Breathe in through the 
right nostril, block the right nostril and breathe out through the left nostril.  Continue for five minutes and finish 
by breathing in through the right nostril.  If you are left -handed you will reverse these fing er positions (thumb 
blocks left nostril and fo urth finger blocks right nostril).  Always breathe in and out gently; do not force the 
breath and do not hold the breath.  Breathe naturally and try to sit upright and in a relaxed and comfortable 
position.  Envision the breath as a light thread of silk, lengthening effortlessly with each inhalation and 
exhalation.  Practice for five to ten minutes.  
 
Rest after your practice and notice how you are feeling. Once comfortable with this practice, you can begin 
mentall y counting to four on your inhalation, pause at the space between the breath and then count to four as you 
exhale, so that the length of your inhalation and exhalation are equal.  
 
There are many variations of alternate nostril breathing. These advanced pra ctices involve increased ratios of 
inhalation to exhalation, longer duration, and the incorporation of breath retention. It is best to practice these 
under the guidance of a yoga teacher or therapist. They are intended as developmental stages to work throu gh 
incrementally as the body gradually adjusts to the increased flow of prana. As with any subtle energy practice 
which activates prana, it is best to start slowly and steadily incorporate it into your daily practice. A shorter 
practice on a consistent bas is will bring more benefit to the body than a longer practice every now and again.  
 
 41 Here are some variations that will help with specific dosha imbalances within the physiology:  
 
Left Nostril Breathing (Pitta Pranayama):  This breathing exercise helps cool the mind and body and is excellent 
for Pitta imbalances.  If the left nostril is blocked the body often feels overheated (a Pitta imbalance).  
 
Instructions:  Block your right nostril with your thumb (fo urth finger if left -handed) and inhale gently 
through the left nostril.  Block your left nostril with your fo urth finger (thumb if left -handed) and breathe out 
through your right nostril.  Repeat for five to ten minutes, finishing by breathing out through your right nostril  
 
Right Nostril Breathing (Kapha Pra nayama):   Helps warm the body and is excellent for Kapha imbalances.  If 
the right nostril is blocked the body often feels cold.  
 
Instructions:  Block your left nostril with your fo urth finger (thumb if left -handed) and inhale gently 
through the right nost ril.  Block your ri ght nostril with your thumb (four th finger if left -handed) and breathe out 
through your left nostril.  Repeat for five minutes, finishing by breathing out through your left nostril  
 
Fast Pranayama:  This practice speed up metabolism and helps with weight loss.  It can also be practiced for 20 -
30 seconds before ‘alternate nostril breathing’.  
 
Instructions:  Repeatedly exhale quickly and forcefully through both nostrils.  You will find that you 
naturally inhale after each out breath.  Repea t this for about one minute and then rest for one minute.  Repeat up 
to five times.  You m a y  find that the body heats up and begins to perspire  slightly indicating that energy is 
flowing and circulation is improving . 
 
Hissing Breath :  This is good for cleansing and detoxifying the lungs and improving lung capacity . 
 
Instructions:   Take two deep abdominal breathes. On the next out -breath, breathe out through your teeth 
to make a ‘hissing’ sound. As you do so lean forward so that your head comes towards your knees. At the end 
out your out -breath immediately breathe in through your nose quite rapidly as your come up to an upright 
position again . Once your lungs are three -quarters full and you are in an upright position hold your breath for as 
long as is comfort able. Now repeat the process six more times.  
 
Kapalabhati :  Th i s i s also good for cleansing and detoxifying the lungs and improving lung capacity . 
 
Instructions:   Take two deep abdominal breathes. Now breathe in to three -quarters capacity. On the next out -
breath, breathe out forcefully twenty times by repeatedly contracting the abdominal muscles. Now take two deep 
abdominal breathes and on the third, breathe in to three -quarters capacity and retain the breath for thirty seconds.  
Repeat this three more times . As you become more accomplished you can increase the number of ‘abdominal 
pumpings’ - up to forty and maybe even sixty. You will also find that you will naturally be able to hold the 
breath for longer – perhaps even up to two minutes duration.  
 
Bell y Br e ath:  This is good for toning the abdomen, improving peristalsis and helping with weight loss.  
 
Instructions:   In a standing position bend your knees and rest your hands on the top of the knees - 
breathe out fully (hold the breath) and then contract abdome n up into diaphragm/rib cage – hold fo r as long as is 
com fortable.  Ex hale.  Repeat this exercise several times. Alternatively you can repeatedly contract the abdomen 
into diaphragm during the holding of the out -breath.  
 
 
 
 
 
 42 Exercise  
 
 
 
Exercise is an imp ortant part of the ayurvedic routine as it helps rid the body of heaviness and stiffness through 
the burning of ama or toxins. It creates greater flexibility, lightness, energy and stamina. It also pacifies all three 
doshas, creates balance, enhances diges tion, improves immunity, dissolves impurities in the tissues, bani sh es  
fatigue, stops early aging  and retards weight gain.  
 
However, too much exercise can be damaging, causing fatigue, lack of glow in the skin and face, pitta and vata 
aggravation and strai n on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. It can also create excess free radicals which 
damage the body and have been linked to over eighty percent of degenerative disease as well as premature aging. 
Ayurveda therefore recommends that no more than f ifty percent of total capacity is utilised, with individual 
capacity depending on daily fluctuations of energy, change of t he seasons, age, and body type.  
 
Vata types needs the least exercise, so lighter activities such as walking are best. Pitta types nee d moderate 
amounts with swimming and skiing being good, whilst Kapha types need more intense exercise - jogging and 
aerobics are good to help them stay in balance. Do more exercise in winter and spring and do less in hot weather 
as this will create fatigue , especially in pitta body types.  
 
Always start out slowly and only gradually increase the intensity and duration of exercise. Stop when you note 
signs of overexertion. You know when you're doing the right amount of exercise if you feel energized and calm 
afterwards. If you feel strained and exhausted, you're doing too much. You can continue to exercise until you 
notice one of the following two signs of overexertion:  
 
1. Difficulty in breathing through the nose. If you have to open your mouth to gulp in air, t hat's a sign that 
your heart is overexerted, the circulation system is taxed  and the coordination of heart and lungs is 
disturbed. You should stop immediately.  
2. Sweating on the forehead or the tip of nose. Sweating elsewhere in the body is fine but when yo u notice 
sweat in these two places it's a sign that you are overexerted and should stop.  
 
Yoga asanas are the ideal form of exercise for all body types and ages, because they balance the three doshas, 
tone the muscles, and rejuvenate all the organs in the body. Practicing pranayama is also a good way to increase 
endurance. An abhyanga oil massage before exercise will tone the muscles, get the blood circulating and prevent 
injury or strain  
 
Exercise every day as part of your reg ular daily routine. If possibl e exercise in the morning before 10am as your 
body has more strength, stamina, and coordination during the kapha time of day. Exercising at this time also 
energizes you  and prepares  you for the day ahead. Exercising in the late evening or tow ards bedtime i s not 
recommended  as it can elevate body temperatures and disrupt sleep rhythms. A light walk or yoga in the evening 
is fine. Also avoid exercise from 10am to 2pm, the pitta time  of day, when the digestive fire is strong  – th i s 
should be reserved for eatin g the main meal of the day.  
 
It's not a good idea to exercise on a full stomach  - wait about two hours after eating a large meal.  However, if 
your stomach is empty and you are very hungry, have a light snack of fruit juice, cooked apple s or some kind of 
light soup before exercising.  
 
It is important to breath through the nose at all time during exercise as this uses the whole of the lungs and not 
just the upper portions. If you are breathing through the mouth you are over -exerting.  
 
 43 If you were at the zoo a nd a tiger escaped from its pen you would most likely take a quick upper -chest “gasping” 
emergency breath. This breath would trigger a fight -o r-flight response in your nervous system as the upper lobes 
of the lungs are primarily innervated by the sympathet ic nervous system. The kind of “gasping” mouth 
breathing, much like a hyperventilation breathing pattern, is a normal breathing response to extreme stress. 
Unfortunately this how most people breathe during exercise and this triggers the same neurological r esponse.  
 
In contrast, the nerves that would calm, rejuvenate and regenerate the body are in the lower lobes of the lungs 
along with the majority of the blood supply. The problem is that most people never breathe into these lower 
parasympathetic dominant l obes.  T h e y  therefore create a minor but constant emergency  situation which creates 
stress hormones and releases excess toxins in to the body . 
 
Thus, we can see that exercise can act as a double -edged sword, where it can either incur stress or remove stress,  
depending on the quality of the breath. The best way to consistently breathe into the lower lobes of the lungs is 
by nasal breathing. The nose is intricately designed to filter, moisten and rarefy the air we take in and drive it 
into the small and distal alveoli of the lungs. It is when these distal lobes are fully perfused with air that the body 
produces a neurological state of composure even while under extreme stress  
 
If you are unfit or aren’t used to exercise first go for a short walk before attemptin g anything more physical. For 
the first ten minutes breath in and out deeply through your nose as you walk fairly slowly. This ensures you are 
exercising your lungs. Be vigilant and make sure that each breath is deeper, longer and slower than the one 
befor e – however, the emphasis should always be on comfort rather than style. It is this experience of comfort 
that you will eventually take you to higher levels of exertion. If you feel relaxed and comfortable, begin to walk 
faster but be sure to maintain the same rhythm of the breath you established at the beginning.  
 
At some point you will notice it becoming more difficult to get the air in through the nose and an ensuing urge to 
take a mouth breath. When your exercise forces you to take your first mouth brea the, you have just forced the 
body into an emergency breathing response to maintain that faster pace. Immediately slow down and recapture 
the original deep, long and slow rhythm of the breath. Once it is re -established, try to walk faster again, telling 
your body you want more performance. When the breathing gets laboured and you open your mouth again, slow 
down once more. Constantly tell your body that you want more performance but that you don’t want to create an 
emergency response. Soon your body will ac commodate a higher level of a natural and more permanent fitness.  
 
Because of the years of lower rib cage constriction you will more than likely find this difficult at first. But, what 
you couldn't do the first day , you will find yourself effortlessly doin g within two or three weeks, whilst 
comfortably breathing through your nose. When this happens your rib cage is effectively and efficiently 
massaging your heart and lungs up to 28,000 times a day. When this starts happening, a natural calming 
influence sta ys with you all day while you deal with all kinds of extreme stressors. Exercise has now become one 
of the your most important health -enhancing tools.  
 44 Tips for enjoying exercise  
 
 
 
Comfort:  If your breath becomes laboured, your heart beats uncomfortably fast or you begin to ache or to get a 
stitch you are not within a zone of comfort and should slow down or stop and rest.  
 
Undivided Attention:   Experience the body and respond to its signals.  Do not watch TV or listen to music but 
allow the mind to be com pletely attuned and connected to the body.  
 
B o d y  T y p e :   Vata types should participate in calming activities such as walking, gymnastics, aerobics, dance, 
cycling, yoga or Tai Chi. Pitta types can cope with more vigorous exercise such as jogging, tennis, sw imming, 
skiing, weight lifting and rowing but should be careful not to become too competitive or overheated.  Kapha 
types need fast, vigorous exercise to counteract their more lethargic physiologies and are better suited to sports 
such as football, running , weight lifting, rugby and hockey.  
 
Warm up:   Ensure you begin any training by first loosening the joints and muscles with a few gentle exercises, 
sun-salute (Suryanamaskara) and yoga.  
 
Massage:  Applying oils before and after a workout is most beneficial .   V a t a -types should apply sesame or 
almond oil with lavender before a workout and sesame or almond oil with marjoram after a workout; Pitta -types 
should apply sesame or coconut oil with lemon before a workout and coconut oil with camomile afterwards 
while  Kapha -types should apply olive or sesame oil with eucalyptus before and sesame or olive oil with 
rosemary after.  A mix of 20:1 base oil to essential oil works well.  
 
Breathing:  Always breathe through the nose as this uses the lower portion of the lungs  where maximum energy 
is exchanged.  This allows proper mind -body coordination by calming the body, slowing the heart rate and 
reducing the flow of adrenalin.  
 
Stress Check:   If on waking your resting heart rate is ten beats above or below normal you shoul d rest or at least 
only take very moderate exercise that day.  This often indicates that the body is under stress, possibly from a 
virus or bacteria, and the body will need its energy resources that day to combat this stress.  
 
Optimum Exercise Heart Rate ( OE HR) :   220 minus your age plus resting heart rate divided by two.  Resting 
heart rate should be ascertained on waking in the morning.  
 
Three Phase Workout:  
Resting Phase  (10 min.): Do not allow heart rate to increase above OEHR minus 30.  
Listening Phase  (15 min): Increase pace but do not allow heart rate to increase above OEHR.  Ensure heart rate, 
breath rate, mental awareness and physical form are comfortable, balanced and correct.  
Performance phase  (10-30 min): Allow your pace to sit around the OEHR and experience comfort, balance, rest 
and euphoria.  If at any time you feel uncomfortable, stressed or tired go back to the Resting or Listening Phase 
and build up again more slowly.  
 
 
 45 Daily exercise plan  
 
 
 
The ideal morning exercise/relaxation routine incl udes:  
• Sun Salute (4 -6 rounds)   5-10 minutes  
• Short walk or run (1 -2 mile)  15-30 minutes  
• Yoga Asanas    10-20 minutes  
• Pranayama & Meditation   20-30 minutes  
 
When time is limited you can vary this routine.  Here is an example to get you started.  
  
• Yoga exercis es   6   minutes   Monday  
• Sun Salute (3 rounds)   3   minutes  
• Pranayama    5   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Yoga exercises    6   minutes   Tuesday  
• Short walk or run (2 mile)   30 minutes  
• Sun Salute (2 rounds)   2   minutes  
• Pranayama    2   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Sun Salute (4 rounds)   4   minutes   Wednesday  
• Yoga Asanas    15 minutes  
• Pranayama    5   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Yoga exercises    6   minutes   Thursday  
• Sun Salute (6 rounds)   6   minutes  
• Pranayama    2   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Yoga exercises    6   minutes   Friday  
• Short walk or run (1 mile)   15 minutes  
• Sun Salute (3 rounds)   3   minutes  
• Pranayama    5   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Sun Salute (4 rounds)   4   minutes   Saturday  
• Yoga Asanas    15 minutes  
• Pranayama    5   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
• Yoga exercises    6   minutes   Sunday  
• Sun Salute (2 rounds)   2   minutes  
• Pranayama    2   minutes  
• Meditation    20 minutes  
 
Weight bearing exercise, tai chi and chi Kung can also be incorporated if these interest you.  
 46 Ayurvedic ‘warm -up’ exercises  
 
 
 
This gentle sequence of warm -up exercises stimulates the cardiovascular system allowing greater oxygen and 
nutrient exchange within the body.  It also promotes the elimination of impurities by increasing the flow of 
lymph through the muscl es and lymphatic system. Repeat each of the movements five times and repeat on both 
sides of the body or in a clockwise and then an anticlockwise direction.  
 
• Head:   Roll clockwise, roll anticlockwise.  
• Head:   Turn to left, turn to right.  
• Head:   Bend back, b end forward.  
• Eyes:   Roll clockwise, roll anticlockwise.  
• Arms:   Swing in a circle backwards, swing in a circle forwards.  
• Shoulders:  Rotate backwards, rotate forwards.  
• Shoulders:  With elbows bent and at shoulder height and swing backward.  
• Shoulders:  With arm s outstretched swing backwards.  
• Elbows:  Keeping upper arm still circle forearms from elbow joint.  
• Wrists:   Rotate clockwise, rotate anticlockwise.  
• Wrists:   With forearm still move wrist from side to side.  
• Wrists:   With forearm still move up and down.  
• Hands :  With forearm still shake the hands, then flick (as though flicking off water).  
• Torso:   Raise arms to shoulder height and use them to swing torso from left to right  
• Waist:   Facing forward bend left from waist, right arm moves over head.  
• Waist:   Bend from  waist and then rotate the torso around the waist.  
• Waist:   Forward bend, backward bend.  
• Hips:   Keeping upper body and legs relatively still rotate in a large circles.  
• Tailbone:  Rotate in small circles.  
• Legs:   Kicks.  
• Legs:   Lift the knee so thighs are paral lel with floor - swing lower leg side to side.  
• Knees:   Lift the knee so thighs are parallel with floor - circle lower leg from knee.  
• Knees:   Kick buttock with heel.  
• Knees:   Hold the foot with one hand and pull against buttock.  
• Ankles:   Lift foot off the fl oor, keep the leg still and circle foot from ankles.  
• Ankles:   Keeping leg still move foot side to side from ankles and then shake.  
• Feet:   Stand on tiptoes several times.  
• Squat:   First on ball of foot and then with feet flat.  
• Stand:  Have feet flat on the fl oor; lock the knees loosely backwards; move the hips forward; 
tuck the stomach in; bring the chest forward; take the shoulders back; keep the neck 
straight – now relax in this posture and be still – observe the breath gently flowing 
through the body for on e minute before lying down.  
 
Relaxing  
• Lie on your back, cover yourself with a blanket and relax - breathe in and slowly allow the out -breath to 
flow gently down the body and out through the feet.  
• Rest your attention on each part of the body in turn, starti ng with the head and neck, and check for any 
discomfort – breathe into these areas and allow them to relax before continuing.  
• Starting at the head, allow each part of the body to relax, feel warm, soft and heavy.  Use the breath to 
allow each area to melt and flow into the floor beneath.  
 47  Yoga Postures  
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 Forward Bend  
Stretch your hands above your head and bend forward from the waist. Rest your 
hands on the floor (or ankles or lower leg if they won’t reach the floor). Flatten and 
lengthen the back towards the buttocks.  The knees may be slightly bent but the back 
should be as straight as possible. Allow the head to be relaxed with the crown 
towards the floor. Breathe into the stretch and rela x the shoulders and neck on each 
out-breath.  
Hip Stretch  
Step forwards by about three feet with the left foot.  Keep your front knee at 
right angles to the body and flex the hips downward towards the floor.  Rest 
your hands on your knee, have your elbows out to the sides and the shoulders 
back. Relax further into the posture on each out -breathe. Remember to keep 
the elbows and shoulders relaxed and the neck and back straight. Repeat with 
the right leg back.  
Warrior Pose  
Step forwards by about four feet wi th the left foot.  Keep your front knee at right 
angles to the body and flex the hips downward towards the floor so that the back 
knee rests on the floor. Link the thumbs and stretch your arms above the head.  
Keep the shoulders back and remember to keep t hem relaxed.  Relax further into 
the posture on each out -breathe. Repeat with the right leg back.  
Triangle Pose  
Have the feet three to four feet apart.  Turn the right foot outwards by 90 
degrees and the other leg by 45 degrees.  Keep facing forwards and bend from 
the waist side -wards towards the right side - do not lean forward.  Place the right 
hand on the floor or hold the ankle and stretch the left arm towards the ceiling.  
Turn the neck to look towards the left hand. Repeat on other side of body.  
Knee Triangle Pose  
Have the feet about four feet apart.  Turn the foot of the leg you are bending 
outwards by 90 degrees and the back foot by 15 degrees.   Bend the right knee 
and rest the right hand on the ground (or have your elbow on the knee) - do 
not bend forwards.  Stretch the top arm upwards and look towards the top 
hand.  Repeat ot the other side of the body.  
Knee Pulls  
Bend one leg and grasp with both hands - pull 
towards the body.  Repeat several times with 
alternating legs.  You can now pull on both 
knees together while relaxing the buttocks 
towards the floor.  
Half Shoulder Stand  
Lie on your back and gently raise your hips off the floor and rais e your 
legs. Support your waist by placing your hands on your hips. Keep the 
elbows close in to the body. Hold this position for one minute. Keep the 
shoulders relaxed and breathe through the nose in a relaxed fashion. If 
this is comfortable you can now at tempt the full Shoulder Stand.  

 48  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shoulder Stand  
From the half shoulder stand raise your hand further up the back. Keep the elbows close in 
to the body and support the body by pressing the hands against the middle back.  Keep the 
back and legs straight and e xtended, locking the chin against the chest.  If there is any 
discomfort in the neck come down immediately.  Always come down with full support of 
the arms - lower yourself slowly and gently.  
 
Plough Pose  
From the Shoulder Stand take the legs back over th e head 
and rest the feet on the floor.  Extend the arms behind you, 
lock the fingers – you may then twist the hands so that the 
palms face away.  Always come down with full support of 
the arms - lower yourself slowly and gently.  
Locust  
Raise both feet by six inches keeping the 
heels together.  Now raise your chest, lift 
the arms upwards and then link the thumbs 
together.  You may hold this posture for as 
long as is comfortable.  
Bow  
Lift the chest, bend the knees and grab the leg above the ankles.  
Stretch  the chest upwards and pull the legs towards your shoulders.   
As you gently breathe you will rock backwards and forwards.  Do 
not attempt this posture if you have any back problems.  
Cobra Pose  
Lift the chest off the floor and support the upper body 
with the arms – do not push with the arms if you have 
any kind of back problem or if the lower back is overly 
stiff.   
Sitting Forward Bend  
Extend both legs and stretch the toes towards you.  Bend 
forwards from the hips/waist - rest your hands near the 
ankles and relax the lower back.  Avoid overly bending the 
upper back, relax the elbows and shoulders and breathe 
easily.  
T w is t  
Bend one leg and place the foot by the outside of the opposite knee.  
Twist from the waist, keeping the back straight, and place the 
supporting hand flat on floor near the hips.  The elbow of the other 
arm helps support the twist by resting on the bent knee.  Do not 
twist too far and come out slowly and gently.  Repeat on other side.  
Rest 
Always finish your yoga practice with ten minute s of rest. Lie on your back and relax your lower back, 
legs, hips and shoulders. Have your legs two feet apart and allow the feet fall outwards. Have your palms 
facing upwards with your hands about twelve inches from the body. Breathe easily into the lower  abdomen 
and relax.  

 49 
              
  
 
Instructions  
 
1. Stand with  the palms together in front of the ch e s t  
2. Breathe in while st retching the arms over the head  (arch the  back slightly ) 
3. Breathe out while bending forward from  the hips  
4. Breathe in while taking the right foot backwards and dropping the knee to the floor  
5. Breathe out while taking the left foot backwards and lifting the hips towards the ceiling  
6. Start breathing in whilst dropping the knees and chest to the floor  
7. Cont inue breathing in as you drop the hips and straighten the arms  to arch the lower back  
8. Breathe out and take the hips back up towards the ceiling  
9. Breathe in and bring the right foot forward (place between hands) and drop the hips  
10. Breathe out and  bring the le ft foot forward to join the right foot (forward bend)  
11. Breathe in and come up into a slight back bend  
12. Breathe out as you come into an upright position with the palms together in front of the chest.  
 
You have now completed half a round – to complete the sun salute repeat the same sequence but this time take the left foot 
back in position 4 and bring forward in position 9. You can do up to six rounds. Practice slowly if you are a Vata type, 
moderately slowly if you are a pitta type and relatively fast if you a re a kapha body -type.  1 
9 2 
3 
4 
5 11 
10 
8 
6 7  
The Sun  
Salute  breathe in  
breathe in  
breathe in  keep breathing  in breathe in  breathe in  
breathe out  
breathe out  
breathe out  breathe out  breathe out  
 50 Guidelines for practicing yoga  
 
 
 
• Try to practice yoga in a warm, clean and quiet environment.  
• Burn some incense to induce a meditative mood.  
• Give yourself plenty of time.  
• Do not practice on a full stomach but eat a light snack if fe eling hungry.  
• Start with a short warm -up exercise routine.  
• Practice a few cycles of the Sun Salute.  
• Never strain or over -exert – breathing should be light and gentle throughout.  
• Ease into postures slowly and gently.  
• Hold each posture easily for up to two m inutes if this feels comfortable and is relaxing.  
• Always stretch within your own capacity – feel the stretch, ease back slightly and then use the out -
breath to gently relax further into the stretch –work within your comfort zone.  
• Never force a stretch beyo nd comfort level – forcing is not yoga.  
• Remember to breathe – do not hold the breath.  
• Breathe out as you bend forwards or restrict the chest area and breathe in when you come out of a 
position or expand the chest area.  
• Allow your attention to rest on the a rea of the body being stretched  and allow it to relax further into the 
stretch on each out -breath.  
• Become one with the body and feel it relaxing – yoga then becomes a form of meditation.  
• The pleasant sensation of stretching and that of pain are very differ ent – do not hold a position if 
bordering on painful.  Pain felt after coming out of a position indicates over -stretching and is not 
conducive to progress.  
• If pain does occur, stop practicing, lie on your back and rest your awareness on the painful sensati o n  – 
breathe into this area and allow the sensation to dissolve and dissipate.  
• If certain positions are uncomfortable at a particular time of day etc miss them out of your routine – t r y  
them again when you feel able.  
• If you attend regular yoga classes and learn positions you’d like to add to your daily routine feel free to 
add them but always remember that a stretch in one direction should be followed by a stretch in the 
opposite direction.  
• After finishing your yoga practice lie on your back for a few minut es and relax.  
• Gentle breathing exercise (pranaya ma) and meditation may be practiced after a yoga session.  
 
 
Above all yoga should be fun  
ENJOY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 51 Yoga Nidra  
 
 
Yoga Nidra means ‘yogic sleep’. It is a state of conscious deep sleep. You leave  t h e wa k ing state, go past the 
dreaming state, and enter a deep sleep, yet remain fully alert, aware and awake. It is a kind of ‘psychic sleep’ 
produced by a systematic method of inducing complete physical, mental and emotional relaxation, while 
maintaining awaren ess at the deeper levels. It is a prolonged suspension between wakefulness and sleep. It 
induces a higher state of consciousness - a wakeful state of deep introversion or an inner awareness . It is a 
movement of consciousness  rather than a deliberate auto -suggestion. You c annot relax by trying to relax - you 
need to feel relaxed. After relaxing your body and calming your mind  you can plant a few intentions, sankalpas, 
or assertions in your subconscious  before detaching your mind and experiencing the final st age of deep 
relaxation.  
 
There is a close relation sh i p between the body and the brain. Vario us centres in the brain control  modify, and 
affect all our bodily functions. In fact, there is a centre in the brain for every act, whether wilful or reflex, 
physic al or mental. Experimental data have identified many such specific centres. Stimulation of these centres 
leads to appropriate actions, be they motor , sensory, emotive or cognitive. Thus we have a holographic 
representation of the body on the brain  with the  left half of the body being represented in right half of the brain 
and the right half of the body being represented in left half of the brain.  
  
In Yoga Nidra we make the brain centres active by focusing awareness on the parts of the body in a specific 
sequence. Thus, w e  t r y  to stimulate various parts of the brain by focusing the awareness on the corresponding 
parts of the body. Awareness can be defined as adopting an attitude of witness towards physical or mental 
actions of the body.  
 
From the Yogic vi e wpoint the body and the mind ( together with the emotions) are so interrelated that they are 
actually inseparable. The mind is not simply the thinking process relegated to the brain but is the sum total of the 
intelligence which permeates every atom of the ph ysical and subtle organisms. Whatever affects the body must 
influence the mind and vice -versa. Since the mind is present throughout the body and permeates its every atom, 
the Yoga techniques which we perform to stretch, strengthen and otherwise improve and  develop the body must 
have a correspondingly profound effect on the mind and the emotions  
 
As we become more familiar with the practice of meditation and begin to perceive the more subtle levels of our 
thought process we also become faintly aware of the j unction point between relative thought and transcendental 
awareness. It is from this threshold of conscious awareness that Yoga Nidra functions and it is from this field 
that we are able to carry faint, positive intentions deep into our sub -conscious mind.  
 
Whilst this ancient technique has been part of the Tantric Yoga tradition for thousands of years there are now 
many derivations of it in our western world. Most follow a fairly standard pattern of procedures, starting with an 
awareness of the breath, pro gressive relaxation, introducing a subtle intention and then a ‘rotation of 
consciousness’ which involves rapidly placing awareness of various parts of the body in a specific sequence.  
 
Yoga Nidra is primarily a technique of subtle intention and directed a wareness. We have a very faint intention 
and then we very innocently direct that intention with our subtle awareness. The more innocently, faintly and 
subtly we are able to do this the more powerful the results. It is a case of ‘do less and accomplish more ’ – the 
less we try , and the less we allow our minds get in the way of our actions , the easier it becomes to accomplishes 
any difficult task.  
 
Our minds are very good at getting in the way of our intentions and often over -ride our intuition  w hic h is never 
wrong and always works for our highest good. We have almost become brainwashed or conditioned into 
believing that the harder we try, the more likely we are to accomplish the desired results. However, this is 
 52 usually our downfall and often leads to the accu mulation of stress, and ultimately failure to achieve our goals in 
life. Meditation and Yoga Nidra are both techniques that re -condition and retrain our minds to function on more 
subtle and powerful levels – t h e y  r e -educate the mind and remind it how to fu nction properly. We so easily 
forget that some of the most amazing things we do take no effort whatsoever. Take the simple act of moving the 
arm above the head – we just do it – we have the intention and the arm moves into exactly the position we 
decided i t should move. We do not have to think the thought over and over again until the arm finally moves by 
shear will power – it just moves in an instant.  
 
Think the word ‘one’ for the briefest of milliseconds and then spend a few minutes faintly observing how  the 
word remains in the awareness long after you’ve thought the word. A part of you recognises that even when the 
word appears to have drifted away completely, it could almost still be there in some dim and distant awareness. 
Try the same exercise with ‘o range’ – see an orange in your mind’s eye and notice how the image stays ‘in the 
mind’s eye’ long after you stopped the intention of visualising an orange. This is the same level and ease at 
which the ‘mantra’ in meditation and the various body -parts in Yo ga Nidra are thought – there is no focus, no 
concentration and no will power involved. The mind is taken out of the equation and the sub -conscious or 
intuitional mind takes over.  
 
As a further example try this little task. Imagine that you are strolling al ong a country path. It suddenly becomes 
very rough and you end up jumping from rock to rock. At one point you realise that the next jump will take you 
across a deep cavern, one hundred feet deep with wild, swirling rapids below. Suddenly, actions that had been 
automatic now become conscious. The rational, intellectual, thinking mind takes over – it over -rides the sub -
conscious mind which was allowing the body to respond automatically, adjusting each step to land in exactly the 
right place for ease and safet y. You stop dead in your tracks – the mind’s saying, ‘it’s a long way down, you 
could get hurt if you misjudge the next step, turn back, it’s not safe to continue’. However, if our ‘conditioned, 
brainwashed’ mind hadn’t taken over we would have just steppe d over it, as it was no wider and no harder to 
step over than any of the other gaps you’d just crossed.  
 
Similarly, image walking down the same country track and then coming across an electric fence that bars your 
w a y .  T h e r e ’ s  a  s i g n  o n  i t  s a ying ‘beware; electric fence – do not touch’. However, it’s still in the process of 
being erected and isn’t y e t  attached to any electrical source so you could just climb under or over it. However, 
your rational mind is telling you ‘don’t touch it, go round’. A part of y ou knows you don’t need to do that and is 
aware that even if the fence was connected to a power source and switched on, it wouldn’t hurt much anyway. 
However, you just can’t bring yourself to touch the fence even though you know it’s not electrified. An al most 
physical barrier is created which will not allow the hand to move anywhere near the fence – the hand has 
surrendered its power to the control of the limited rational, intellectual mind and over -ridden the higher -
functioning, the sub -conscious or intui tional mind.  
 
Meditation and Yoga Nidra are simple techniques that strengthen the mind and help it to remain centred and 
grounded in situations such as these. Obviously, these are both extreme situations that most of us don’t normally 
find ourselves in but  they hopefully illustrate the point fairly well. Less dramatic situations which we may find 
ourselves in , or m a y  be able to relate to more easily , could be: panicky feelings before interviews, auditions or 
public -speaking; having to apologise or retract o ur words; picking up a spider or other animal; eating certain 
foods or drinking herbal substances we know to be extremely sour or bitter.  
 
Yoga Nidra helps re -educate and strengthen the mind and allows us switch off our lower, limiting conditioned 
reflexes  in situations such as these. It allows us to act instantaneously and appropriately without the need to 
weigh up and evaluate every possible outcome. When we are able to do this naturally our lives become peaceful 
and fulfilling and our mind and body remai n vital and healthy. We then begin to function at that powerful level 
on the very threshold of consciousness where all desires are spontaneously fulfilled.  
 
One of the main practices involved during Yoga Nidra is called ‘rotation of awareness’ during which  the mind 
quickly observes different parts of the body. From neuro -physiology we know that each part of the body has a 
 53 different control centre in the brain  —curiously, small ones such as the fingers or armpits claim a large brain 
area.  The movement of awa reness through different parts of the body not only relaxes them, but also clears nerve 
pathways to the brain.  
 
Another aspect of Yoga Nidra involves alternating opposite awareness of sensations such as heat and  cold, 
heaviness and lightness. This aspect helps to improve the body's ability to regain balance and brings the related 
involuntary functions under conscious control. Visualization is a method of consciously using a symbol o r image 
as a catalyst to provoke a reaction in the unconscious mind. But sin ce no time is given for the conscious mind to 
react, the mind  remain s detached and the ego becomes temporarily inactive. This phase helps to resolve 
suppressed conflicts, desires, memories and sanskaras  (karmic tendencies) . 
 
 
The Practice of Yoga Nidra  
 
Practice 10 -20 minutes of Yoga asanas.  
Practice 10 -20 minutes of meditation.  
Lie comfortably on your back with your eyes closed, feet apart and palms up. Cover yourself with a blanket to 
keep warm.  
 
First you will consciously tense and then relax each area o f the body starting with the feet and legs. Lift the right 
leg about four inches off the floor. Stretch the toes away from the body and then stretch them towards the head. 
Clench the toes tightly. Tense the whole foot and leg and then it relax completely a nd drop to the floor. Repeat 
this with the other leg. Lift the right arm about four inches from the floor, clench the fists and then stretch the 
fingers. Tense the hand and arm together and then let it relax completely and drop to the floor. Repeat this wi th 
the other arm. Lift and tense the abdomen and then let it completely relax. Lift and tense the chest and then let it 
completely relax. Make a tight face as though you are sucking on a lemon and then let it completely relax. Open 
the eyes and mouth as wi de as possible and stick your tongue out fully. Now relax the face completely.  
 
Now you are going to subconsciously relax each part of the body in turn starting with the feet. Repeat each of 
these phases to yourself as you move around the body. Start with the feet. “I relax my feet, I relax my feet, I 
relax my feet” “my feet are relaxing,” “my feet are completely relaxed.”  
 
Use these same phrases as you move to the calves, knees, thighs, buttocks, lower back, upper back, whole back, 
shoulders, hands, forear ms, elbows, upper arms, head, scalp, brain, eyes, cheeks, chin, abdomen, diaphragm, 
intestines, liver, kidneys, pancreas, heart, lungs and whole body.  
 
 
Now start with the number twenty eight and say, “twenty eight, my whole body is relaxing,” “twenty seve n, my 
whole body is relaxing more,”  “twenty six, my whole body is relaxing even more,”  “twenty five, my whole body 
is relaxing more,”  twenty four, my whole body is relaxing more.” Keep counting and repeating similar phrases 
until you reach number one. If y ou lose count start again at number twenty eight.  
 
Next you silently repeat a sankalpa , or resolve  regarding your higher aims in life . It should be a short , clear and 
precise  statement, phrased in positive language and in the present tense. For example, yo ur resolve could be: "I 
am taking full care of my fa mily," “I am awakening my spiritual potential,” “I am successful in my all 
undertakings,” “I a m in perfect health,” “I am  a positive help in the spiritual progress of others.” Be aware that as 
the resolve  becomes embedded deep in the subconscious it is bound to bear fruit in the fullness of time.  Repeat 
your resolve mentally three times with feeling and  awareness.  
 
Now begin the rotation of awareness.  Visualize the part of the body mentioned by the instruc tor; it can be a 
teacher or a tape -recorder or even your memory once you are familiar with the process. You should not move 
any part of your body; it must remain completely passive and relaxed. Quickly shift your awareness from body 
 54 part to body part corre sponding with the instructions from your teacher. You should not imagine the next body 
part before your teacher mentions it. Remain alert, but do not concentrate. The mind must be allowed to quickly, 
silently and innocently move from body part to body part  with no anxiety or expectation.  
 
This is the sequence:  
Become aware of the right side of the body. Take your awareness quickly to the right hand thumb, index finger, 
middle finger, ring finger, little finger, palm, back of the hand, wrist, arm, elbow, sho ulder, armpit, waist, hip, 
thigh, kneecap, calf muscle, ankle, heel, sole of the foot, the top of the foot, big toe, second toe, third toe, fo urth 
toe, little toe, all the toes. 
Now repeat the previous step but this time with the left side.  
 
Bring the awar eness to the lower back, middle back, upper back . Become aware of the shoulder blades, the 
buttocks, the spine, the whole back together.  Now go to the top of the head, the forehead, temples, the eyebrows, 
the space between the eyebrows, eyelids, eyes, ears , cheeks, nose, the tip of the nose, lips, chin, throat, right 
chest, left chest, navel, abdomen... the whole front.  The whole of the right leg, the left leg, both legs together. 
The whole of the right arm, the left arm, both arms.  The whole body  
 
Througho ut this entire process you should have the resolve not to sleep. Say to yourself : "I am fully awake, I am 
practicing Y oga Nidra”.  
 
After rotation of consciousness comes awareness of breath. Become aware of your breath, either at the nostrils, 
throat passag e, lung area or abdomen and gently observe how naturally the breath flows in and out with no 
conscious effort from yourself. Simply allow yourself to be “breathed”. Focusing the attention on the act of 
breathing completes physical relaxation and  concentrat es the mind. It also allows the sense centres to withdraw 
from their objects of sensations.  
 
Now concentrate on your body, as if seeing it from the outside. Look at your body lying on the floor as an object, 
a reflection in an imaginary mirror.  Just innoce ntly observe and watch; do not judge.  
 
Now imagine a deep, dark well . Look into i t. There is a bucket on a chain.  Lower it into the well. It moves into 
the darkness of the well. You cannot see it. Now pull the bucket up, out of the darkness, into the light . Now a sk  
yourself : "What am I thinking?" Do not deliberately think, but just become aware of the thought process  arising , 
become a n observer, a  wi tn ess  to the natural, spontaneous movement of the mind . Now ask yourself “who am I”. 
Do not try to answer thi s question; do not allow the intellect or ego to interfere. Just ask the question, let it go 
and allow the mind to remain alert and clear.  
 
Next comes relaxation at the level of feelings and emotions . Here we become aware of intense physical and 
emotional feelings and their opposites such as hot and cold, light and heavy, pain and pleasure, joy and sorrow.  
 
First imagine your body is made of light, silky cotton. Your body feels as though it floats  above the floor. Now 
allow it to be heavy as though it is made of lead.  
 
Now imagine you lie on a beach under the hot sun - awaken the sensation of heat. The whole body is hot. Now 
imagine you are in a pool of cold, cold ice - experience bitter cold in the body.  The body shivers.  
 
Try to remember an experience of pain, mental or physical  - relive it, make it vivid. Don’t dwell on the image for 
long, don’t try and judge or analyse it. Now t ry to remember an experience of a feeling of pl easure —relive it, 
make it vivid but don’t try and judge or analyse it.  
 
The last phase of Yoga Nidra relates to mental relaxation and involves a rapid visualization  of nature images and 
abstract symbols. This pr actice helps to develop self -awareness and concentration. Be relaxed and innocent and 
 55 try to visualize the images on the level of feeling, awareness and emotion. Let each image appear like a slide on 
your mental screen.  
 
Now begin. Flickering candle… flick ering candle… tall palm tree, a car moving on the road, yellow clouds, blue 
clouds, starlit night, full moon, standing dog, reposing cat, moving elephant, racing horse, rising sun behind the 
mountains, setting sun behind the mountains, setting sun behind t he ocean, ocean with waves, a big lake with 
crystal clear water, blue lotus, white lotus, pink lotus, a boat sailing on the water —see the ripples, chimney 
smoke rising from an old house, the dawn of the day, a yogi in deep meditation.  
 
Now ask yourself aga in “who am I”. Do not try to answer this question; do not allow the intellect or ego to 
interfere. Just ask the question, let it go and allow the mind to remain alert and clear. Become a witness of your 
awareness - not the bod y ,  n o t  t h e  s e n s e s ,  n o t  t h e  m i n d; nothing but awareness. Become aware that you are 
observing yourself. Look within and try to be aware of the one who is looking.  
 
Now take your awareness to the space above the eyebrows – the third eye, the centre of intuition . Imagine a 
flaming golden, sparkling, shimmering light. Breathe in that golden light and allow it to fill your head, your 
lungs, your abdomen, your whole body and the space around your body. Take a few minutes just to experience, 
appreciate and absorb that pure energy which now fill s your whole being.  
 
Now start with the number one and say, “one, my whole body is becoming more awake,” “two, my whole body 
is becoming even more awake,”  “three, my whole body is even more awake,”  “four, my whole body is 
awakening more,”  five, my whole bo dy is becoming even more widely awake.” Keep counting and repeating 
similar phrases until you reach number twenty eight. If you lose count start again at number one.  
 
Now finally repeat once again the resolve or sankalpa  that you thought at the beginning o f your practice. You 
are consciously directing the unconscious mind regarding your true goal in life. This time the unconscious is 
very receptive and will therefore accept the suggestion from the conscious mind with more intensity. In due 
course, depending  upon the sincerity and regularity of the practice, the resolve bears fruit in life.  
 
Relax all efforts, draw your mind outside and become aware of your breathing. Become aware of your 
surroundings, the room you are in. Lie quietly for some time and keep y our eyes closed. Now s tart moving your 
fingers and toes and stretch  your body  gently . When you are sure that you are wide awake, sit up slowly and 
open your eyes.  
 
 56 Summary of h ealthy lifestyle  principles  
 - all body -types  - 
 
 
 
• Retire to bed before 10m as the deepest rest is acquired in the hours before midnight . 
• Arise in the Vata period before dawn as this helps ensure  maximum mental and physical energy 
throughout the day . 
• Oil massage each morning to tone the skin and muscles . 
• Exercise for at least 20 -30 m inutes each day – a short walk is ideal.  
• Practice  pranayama to calm the mind, purify the lungs and  tone th e abdomen.  
• Practice gentle yoga  exercises to rid the body of toxins and maintain the immune system . 
• Practice meditation for twenty minutes each mornin g and late afternoon . 
• Spend time walking in nature and exploring new places  to renew the senses and inspire the mind.  
• Read inspiring books and cut down on television . 
• Burn essential oils in aroma burners  to uplift and calm the mind . 
• Have some quiet time to  yourself each day  to rest, relax and reduce stress . 
• Maintain the company of like -minded people.  
• Be gentle, kind and considerate to yourself and others.  
• Try and reduce contact with stressful people and environments.  
• Take pride in your work – always give yo ur best.  
• Have a ‘Mini Detox’ each month and undertake a ‘Panchakarma Detox’ twice a year (see detox section)  
 
 
 
 
 
 57 Chapter 3  
Ayurvedic detox p rogram s 
~ to maintain the digestiv e system in a state of balance and  harmony ~  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The thing we fear the most is not that we will shrivel up and beco me insignificant little people.  
The thing we fear the most is that we could become as big and grand as we are capable of becoming.  
~ Nelson Mandela  ~ 

 58 Introduction  
 
 
 
Every day b illions of atoms and m olecules are effortlessly replaced and in less than a year we literally have a 
completely new body.  We therefore have the ability to reverse some of the damage we may have caused due to 
our bad habits, lifestyle choices and poor diet. We can interrupt the  process  of neglect and decay and replace 
unhealthy molecules, cells and energy patterns with healthy , life-sustaining new  ones.  
 
Once we begin to relax our  mind , control our emotions  and cleanse our body; especially the gastro -intestinal 
tract - we begin to experience better health.  The colon is intimately connected to all the  tissues and organs of the 
body. This i s wh y  the simple process of cleansing the colon can so dramatically affect the wh ol e body and 
relieve so many of our health issues in such a sh ort period of time . 
 
Poor lifestyle and dietary choices cause t he vital systems of our bodies to become energetically imbalanced, our 
enzymatic activity to decrease and our digestive capacity to be impaired. As a consequence, the food we eat, 
however whole some, is no longer able to provide the tissues with the nutrients they need to repair and maintain 
themselves and our immune  system , nervous system and endocrine system all begin to malfunction.  
 
In the short term this may simply result in excess fat, hear t irregularities, liver problems, constipation and 
indigestion. However, as more toxic material accumulates, especially on the intestinal wall, malabsorption 
increases and assimilation and metabolism of nutrients to our cells and deeper tissues  are hindere d still further .  
The long term result is chronic illness, low energy, low self -esteem and a disturbed mind.  Fortunately Ayurveda 
has many solutions to these problems; the main one being Panchakarma therapy.  
 
How we accumulate toxins in the body  
Our bodies  are in a constant state of repair and renewal. During this process we naturally produce metabolic 
waste which must be eliminated effectively in order to stay healthy. We are also exposed to bacteria, viruses and 
other pathogens on a daily basis.  As long a s our immune and digestive system is strong, healthy and balanced it 
is easily able to cope with this onslaught without any adverse reactions or illnesses.  
 
However, if we constantly eat devitalised, refined and processed food; breathe polluted air; drink impure liquids; 
take pharmaceutical drugs; entertain nega tive thoughts; fail to exercise;  work too hard; suffer from stress; sleep 
excessively; go to bed late; wake late; eat at the wrong time of day and eat foods inappropriate for our body -t y p e ,  
toxins ca n build up to levels that the body is unable to cope with adequately. We then become tired and 
depressed and begin to suffer from ill health.  
 
As the toxins ( ama) build up they begin to solidify and crystallise  and interfere with the functioning of the 
tissues. E ventually they cause hardening of the joints, muscles and bones , blocking of the arteries and 
impairment of the digestive process. Chronic constipation, indigestion, bloating, bad breath, excess weight, wa t er  
retention, fatty deposits, cysts, cellul ite, anxiety, heaviness, tiredness, pain in the lower back and joints,  
persistent headaches, varicose veins and other more serious complaints also begin to manifest.  
 
The white coating on the tongue each morning gives a good indication of the amount of men tal stress and 
physical toxicity in our tissues .  If our digestion is strong and the body is healthy this toxic residue (ama) doesn’t 
appear - a newborn baby’s tongue is pink and lacks the white, toxic coating of many  adults  today . 
 
Ama is essentially undi gested food and the coating on the tongue becomes especially thick and profuse if the 
colon is functioning poorly. It usually becomes even more noticeable after eating and/or drinking late in the  
 
 
 59  
 
evening. At this time of day the body is unable to dige st large quantities of food and undigested residues are left 
permeating the bodily tissues. This is one of the main reasons muscles can feel stiff, sore, tired and heavy in the 
morning; the muscle fibres are literally tangled or ‘glued’ together by thick, sticky mucus or ama (the same as 
the coating on the tongue) and they can no longer glide smoothly and freely over each other .  
 
As soon as we become aware of dis -harmony in the body, whether it be tiredness, stress, negativity, anger, 
anxiousness, depressi on or physical symptoms such as nausea, skin rashes, pain or stiffness, we should quickly 
try and redress the balance by reducing the amount of toxins entering the body whilst also reducing the toxins 
stored in the body. This can only be achieved by changi ng our diet and lifestyle, increasing our digestive 
capacity, cleansing our colon and detoxifying our bodily tissues. Just changing our diet or taking a few herbal 
remedies will be unsuccessful, or at least limited in its affect, if we do not also cleanse the body at the same time.  
 
Once the digestive system has been purified, balanced and strengthened, the ingestion of pure, unrefined foods 
and the taking of herbal teas and remedies will start to have the desired affect on the areas of the body we 
specific ally wish to improve. Our ultimate goal should be to create constant energy, vitality, lightness, love, 
compassion and joy which are our inherent birthright and allow us to act efficiently, effectively and 
appropriately at all times; they are also the true  measure of a healthy mind and body.  
 
To summarise by way of an analogy; perhaps one of the best ways to understand the effects or consequences of 
toxins in the body is by viewing it in a similar way to a rain barrel.  The barrel collects rainwater and as long as 
some of the water is drawn off regularly it will never overflow and damage the area surrounding it.  If we view 
the human body in a similar way; as long as we don’t ingest and fill the tissues with too many toxins, we can 
flush them from our body b efore any l ong -term damage occurs to our vital organs.  Furthermore, we are also able 
to increase the size of the barrel itself through the practice of some of Ayurveda’s more subtle healing modalities 
such as rejuvenation ( rasayana ) therapy, gem therapy, c olour therapy, mantra therapy, yoga practice, breathing 
techniques ( pranayama ) and meditation.  
 
On the other hand, if we constantly ingest toxic material over a prolonged period of time the body finally reaches 
a point where it is no longer able to process  and eliminate them properly and they begin to damage our tissues 
and organs. Our health suffers and we become prone to diseases of the mind and body - the barrel is now 
overflowing.  The longer we ignore the signs and symptoms and refuse to change our way s ,  t h e  g r ea t er  t h e 
likelihood of a serious chronic problem developing and the harder it becomes to regain control over the problem.  
 
Twice yearly courses of panchakarma treatments of ten to fourteen days duration help maintain the body in peak 
condition – they keep the barrel from overflowing. However, once a chronic ailment had become established it 
may be necessary to undertake a Panchakarma program for up to two months duration before the damage is 
undone  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 60 Background to panchakarma  
 
 
Panchakarma  is the Sanskrit term for detox or purification and translates as the five ( pancha ) actions ( karma ) 
necessary to cleanse the body  of accumulated waste material.  
 
It is a special branch of Ayurveda, an ancient Indian system of medicine, which has been in prac tice for thousands of 
years for the purpose of both enhancing health and well -being and rectifying long -standing, chronic diseases. It 
rejuvenates and revitalises the mind and body and systematically strengthens and balances all the bodies’ major 
tissues a nd organs using a wide spectrum of therapeutic measures.  
 
The modern trend is to detox the body with herbal concoctions, coffee enemas and colonic irrigation. However, these 
methods are often only partially successful as they fail to treat the body in an i ntegrated way and only target limited 
organs of the body. They tend to help with the elimination of water -based toxins only and leave the more resistant , 
and potentially disease causing, oil -based toxins behind.  
 
Panchakarma treatment however, is unique in  its ability to effectively eliminate both water -based and oil -based 
toxins from  the body and in doing so helps to rejuvenate and revitalis e the wh ol e body.  Through a series of 
therapeutic procedures that are tailored to the client’s individual constitutio n or imbalance ( prakru ti) it systematically 
helps release, melt, loosen, mobilise and eliminate toxins and impurities from all the bodily issues.  
 
Once our tissues have been cleansed and our digestive fire has been strengthened, the food and herbs we eat are then 
capable of being effectively metabolised by the body. Improvement in health is then possible.   
 The be nefits of Panchakarma   
• Cleanses the digestive tract  
• Increases energy and vitality  
• Balances the mind  
• Stre ngthe ns the  immune  system  
• Reduces stress  and anxiety  
• Improves digestion, assimilation  
• Eliminates disease -causing free -radicals  
• Strengthens the endocrine system  
• Creates clarity of mind  
• Releases negative emotions  
• Reduces mental ‘chatter’  • Increases muscle strength and tone  
• Strengthens and regenerat es bone tissue  
• Balances the nervous system  
• Decreases cholesterol  
• Unblocks arteries  
• Balances high and low blood pressure  
• Eliminates toxins and metabolic waste  
• Detoxifies the liver and blood  
• Increases health and happiness  
• Improves complexion and skin tone  
 
For a detox to be totally successful  we must first rest the mind and the digestive system as these are our two m ost  
energy -demanding activities . This allows us to maximize the amount of potential energy available for cleansing, re -
balancing and strengtheni ng the body.  The next step is to gently move waste products and toxins ( ama) from where 
they are lodged in the deeper structures of the body and to eliminate them either through the nose and mouth 
(through nasya & vamana therapy), the gastro -intestinal tr act (through enema or basti therapy) or through the pores 
of the skin (through heating or sweating therapy  - svedana ). Finally, we then need to nourish and strengthen the 
body. To safely and comfortably flush toxins and impurities from the body requires several important stages.  
 
 
 
 
 61 The seven stages of a panchakarma detox 
rejuvenation program   
Stage one – palliation ( shamana ) 
 
In order to rebalance the mind and body with these powerfully relaxing and luxurious panchakarma therapies 
the digestive system need s to be functioning properly and the tissues need to be cleansed of accumulated 
metabolic waste ( ama). This is achieved by following a light, easily digestible diet for a period of at least one 
week before the main treatment program begins. Herbal digestiv e stimulants are usually given to enhance this 
process and to spark the digestive fire ( agni). This pre -detox diet necessitates avoiding heavy foods such as 
meat and dairy and eating only light food such as rice, vegetables and lentils ( dhal). Light exerci se, walking in 
the fresh air, meditation and yoga are also indicated. Con tr a -indications during the seven stages of the 
Panchakarma  program include: anger, excessive talking , shouting , travelling , sleeping during day , sitting too 
long, over-eating , eating before previous meal is digested , unwholesome diet , coitus , excessive exercise , sun 
bathing , swimming , extreme heat , extreme cold , windy weather , cold baths  and c old drinks . 
 
Stage two – pre-treatment ( purvakarma)  
 
Purvakarma involves ingesting a fatty age nt (snehana ) such as ghee (clarified butter) for several days in order to 
gradually penetrate all seven bodily tissues  and release their stored toxins .  
Day  1:  Cleanses the colon of  ama and mala  (waste)  
Day 2:  Balances and nourishes the vata areas of th e body and calms the mind  
Day 3:  Balances and nourishes the pitta areas, especially the blood ( rakta ) and lymph ( ra s a ) 
Day 4:  Draws toxins from the kapha  areas of the body, especially the muscle tissue ( mamsa ) 
Day 5:  Draws toxins from the kapha  areas of  the body especially the adipose/fat tissue ( meda ) 
Day 6:  Draws toxins from bone tissue and balances vata (asthi)  
Day 7:  Draws toxins from the bone marrow and nerve tissue and balances vata (majj a) 
Day 8:  Draws toxins from the reproductive tissue (semen /ovum - shukra)  
 
The snehana  substance is taken early in the morning and replaces breakfast. We then eat only when this has 
been fully digested – this may be anything from six to twelve hours depending on the amount consumed.  
During this phase of the detox  it is important for us to eat only when we are properly hungry – often we 
experience a ‘false’ hunger which can be eased by sipping hot water.  
 
Meanwhile, eating a light diet, low in fat and calories helps break down and release stored body fat  and also 
allows impurities within the fat cells to become  more concentrated.  Because the  ingested ghee that is 
circulating in the bloodstream is free of toxins and impurities  it exerts an osmotic pressure and draws the toxins 
from the tissue cells and carries them to the liver and intestines.  Light, herbalised oil massage, h ot baths and 
steam or sweating  therapy ( svedana ) during this time help increase blood flow and allow toxins to be released 
and directed towards the liver and small intestine more effectively.  These preparatory measures , whilst ensuring  
that the body' s ch annels are open so that toxins can move out , also ensure that nutritive substances can move 
into the tissues ( dhatus ). The body is now soft, smooth, light and fluid and adequately prepared for virechana , 
the next stage of the Panchakarma procedure.  
 
Note on ghee : this highly nutritious a food source contains an excellent balance of health giving fatty acids. It is 
very low in polyunsaturated fat, moderate in monounsaturated fat an d i s also a good s ource of vitamins A, D, E, 
and K . It has anti-carcinogenic and antioxidant properties due to its linoleic acid content .  
 62 Stage three - purgation ( virechana )  
Virechana  is an orally administered,  h er b-induced purgative treatment  that moves acidic secretion s and 
impurities ( ama)  from the pitta regions (mainly the blood, liver, gall -bladder and small intestines) to the rectum.  
There are many herbs that may be used for this treatment but castor oil is often the purgative of choice as it is 
relatively mild and  produces the desired affect in most healthy adults. Any physical or mental activity, which 
would draw energy away from the gastrointestinal tract, is contraindicated during this process as this severely 
limits its cleansing effect s. 
 
It is usually adminis tered very early in the morning, or during pitta time when pitta-related ama naturally 
accumulates in the pitta regions.  If virechana  is administered in the late evening , it is taken two to three hours 
after a light meal . The meal should be  relatively hot,  spicy and sour  tasting as these tastes help promote pitta-
related secretions .  By late evening  the meal will have reached the small intestine and will therefore allow the 
herbal stimulus to exert its cleansing influence on the  pitta organs  and tissues.  
 
After ingesting the purgative  there follows a series of three to fifteen loose bowel movements a few hours later. 
The number of movements varies depending on the client ’s Ayurvedic constitution and the amount of ama 
present in the pitta region of the body . The fecal matter is usually fairly solid at first, but progressively softens 
until it is enti rely liquid. Mild cramping or burning sensations occasionally occur due to pitta -related ama being 
expelled . This  can be counteracted by  ingesting a small amount o f ghee.  
 
If there are less than three or four bowel movements this indicates that ama was not fully eliminated from the 
small intestine  and virechana  therapy needs repeating . If cleansing is incomplete there may sometimes be 
feelings of  bloating or hardne ss in the abdomen, itching on the skin, a metallic taste in the mouth, or nausea in 
the stomach due to the retention of gas, feces, toxins and waste products in the small intestines.  Ginger tea will 
help reduce these sensations as will a warm hot -wa t er  bo ttle over the abdomen. Once the bowel movements 
become completely liquid they may contain some mucus . This indicates that the small intestine has been 
emptied and mucus from the stomach and the kapha areas of the body is starting to come out. Once all the ama, 
waste material  and toxins have been expelled from the small intestine  the purging process ceases  and the  urge to 
evacuate naturally subsides. The body now feels stronger , clearer  and revitalized.  
 
Following completion of virechana  chamomile or licoric e tea is drunk to soothe the intestinal tract  and rest i s 
taken in a warm, relaxed environment.  Exercise and sexual activity is contra -indicated and a light diet of rice 
water and rice and lentil soup is followed for several days or until full digestive s trength returns.  It is very 
important at this stage not to eat or drink anything cold  as this will shrink the bodily channels, aggravate vata 
and tax an a lready weakened digestive fire.  
 
After a successful virechana  digestion improves, appetite increases,  abdominal bloating and heaviness 
disappear, the mind feels calm and clear, skin inflammation clears and the body  feels clean, strong and vital.  
Virechana therapy promotes metabolism and assimilation by enkindling the digestive fires of all the tissues 
(dhatus) whilst simultaneously cleansing waste products and burning ama.  It is excellent for all pitta-related  
disorders such as malabsorption, acne, dermatitis, psoriasis, eczema, leprosy, leukoderma, hyperacidity, colitis, 
urticaria, hemorrhoids, headaches,  migraine and allergies.  It also reduces excessive body heat and acidity, 
deeply cleanses the blood, liver and bile, promotes clarity of mind, sharpens the sense organs, strengthens and 
rejuvenates bodily tissues and improves digestion. It is excellent for  persons suffering from gout, fever, skin 
diseases, hematemesis, hemorrhoids, anemia, worms, headaches, chest pains, burning eyes, cataracts, asthma, 
jaundice, epilepsy, ascitis, lactation, disorders of the bones and joints  and gynecological disorders.   
 63 Stage four – graduated diet ( samsarjana krama )  
Virechana  treatment temporarily lowers  the digestive fire as ama is drawn back into the digestive tract and then 
expelled from the body.  As weak  digestion creates the  potential for disease to arise in the fir st place, it is of 
utmost importance that digestion is strengthened at the conclusion of virechana . 
 
In order to  re-establish full digestive capacity and prevent the formation of new ama the diet following 
virechana  must be very light to begin with , and on ly very gradually increase in heaviness  over the following 
few days .  Only if this procedure is followed properly will digestive strength be maximized, food and medicine 
properly digested, absorbed and assimilated and immunity  from disease be accomplished.   
 
The diet following virechan a therefore starts with one or two very easily digested meals of rice water ( Peya ). 
This is followed by one or two meals of a slightly thicker gruel or watery rice soup called Vilepi . Finally a 
thicker soup of rice, lentils, h erbs and spices is taken. A little ghee, black salt and jaggary is added to  the first 
few preparations with fresh ginger, turmeric, cumin, coriander and fennel added in the later preparations to 
enkindle the digestive fire.  
 
The final preparation of rice a nd lentils is called Kichari and this diet is adhered to throughout the whole course 
of Panchakarma treatments.  Kichari is very nourishing, easy to digest, provides complete and balanced 
nutrition, and is suitable for all typ es of constitution as  it balan ces all three doshas. It strengthens all seven  
tissues ( dhatus) and aids  the detoxification process . It is therefore also recommended during any period of 
illness, detoxification or rejuvenation process.  The length of time s pent on this diet depends on  digestive 
capacity and is usually determined by the inherent Ayurvedic constitution.  
 
The strength of our appetite is of key importance during this process. Only if it is strong  are we are ready to eat , 
as a strong appetite is our body's signal that digestio n, assimilation and elimination are working well.  Those of 
a pitta constitution may find their digestion is back to full strength after only three light meals , while a person of 
a kapha  constitution may find their digestion isn’t back to full strength unt il after ten light meals have been 
taken.  Drinking freshly grated, ginger root tea and cumin seeds will also help restore the appetite.  
 
When a graduating diet is followed in this way after virechan a the digestive fire ( agni) is slowly built up, 
enabling i t to become strong and powerful. The process is similar to the steps necessary to build a bonfire. It is 
started using paper, dried grass and twigs and only when it is burning brightly are larger pieces of wood added. 
It is then gradually built up using pr ogressively larger pieces of wood. Once the fire  is burning at full strength it 
will burn, and reduce to fine ashes, almost anything that is added to it.  
 
Once our appetite it is back to normal we should ensure that we follow  the usual Ayurvedic recommenda tions 
for maintaining a strong and healthy digestion.  This includes;  eating only when hungry, eating until sated and 
not until the stomach feels full and heavy, eating the largest meal at mid -day, eating a light meal in the early 
evening, avoiding sn ackin g between meals, not d rinking cold drinks ( especially with meals ), eating in a calm 
environment, avoiding heavy, fried foods and fasting for a day once or twice a month.  
 64 Stage five: enema ( basti ) therapy  
 
Virechana is followed by basti w hich is the main t reatment for nourishing and balancing vata and also for 
flushing impurities from the colon .  This is a very powerful  therapy and Ayurvedic texts state that over 50% of 
diseases  can be resolved  by this procedure alone.  D u r i n g  basti ,  herbal preparations are administered into 
the colon via the rectum. However, unlike mode rn e ne ma the rapies, its effect is nutritive and e ne rgy 
balancing rather than simply cleansing. Due to the preparatory treatments given beforehand, basti 
indirectly affects all the other bodily  organs and tissues, as the colon is linked to and nourish es, 
supports and sustains  all areas of the body.  
 
The colon is not only the main organ concerned with the absorption of nutrients and the elimination 
of waste mate rial  b u t  i t  i s  a l s o  t h e  m a i n  s e a t  o f vata, the primary energy that governs all physiological 
activities in the body. When vata is functioning normally it s movement  facilitates the removal of 
impurities, toxins and waste matter from the tissues and helps eliminate  them from the body. By 
balancing the energy of v a t a  through basti we are able to control the onset of disease as we prevent 
toxins (ama) from being carried from the gastrointestinal tract into the deeper tissues where they can 
generate disease.  
 
Basti  therapy is used to treat vata disorders such as osteoporosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, 
multiple sclerosis, muscular -dystrophy, constipation, low back pain, sciatica, rheumatism, arthritis, gout, 
epile psy and mental fatigue.  
 
T h e  f i r s t  b a s t i  t o  b e  a d m i n i s t e r e d  i s  t h e  A n u wasan or oil based enema. It is nourishing and balancing to  
vata and also lubricate s, nourishes and strengthens the tissues  ( d h a t u s )  of the body. As this is a 
relatively small enema ( matra  b a s t i )  i t  i s  o f t e n  retained in the body for over t h r e e  h o u r s  a n d  p e ople 
with particularly dry colons w i l l  often absorb much of the oil. They are usually administered before 
and af ter the eliminating bastis ( niruha  or shodhana ) as they counteract the more depleting nature of 
this powerful purification therapy. Oil based ba stis are good for treating  problems relating to muscles,  
bone, bone marrow and nerve tissu e  a n d  are often prescribed for chronic neuromuscular disorders.  
 
The second basti administered during a Panchakarma  detox  is an eliminating  wa t er -based enema  called a  
shodhana  or niruha  basti .  This is a cleansing enema containing ghee, sesame oil, honey, black salt, licorice, 
fennel and Dashamula . It removes toxins ( ama) that have  been drawn into the colon from all the tissues and 
organs of the body during the pre -treatment pro cedures. This enema is sometimes retained in the colon for over  
thirty minutes. During this time some of the herbs and oils are absorbed by the colon and serve to purify, 
nourish , repair and strengthen  the entire body whilst the bulk of the decoc tion is expelled along with  metabolic 
wa st e,  fecal  matter and accumulated toxins. Each day the cleansing process reaches progressively deeper levels 
of the physiology, clearing the energetic pathways of vata, pitta a nd kapha  and nourishing and purifying th e 
seven tissues (dhatus).  
 
1s t basti : C l e a n s e s  t h e  c o l o n  o f  m e t a b o l i c  t o x i n s ,  i m p u r i t i e s  ( a m a )  an d  w as t e  p r o d uc t s  ( m a l a ) . 
2n d basti : B a l a n c e s ,  c l e a n s e s  a n d  n o u r i s h e s  t h e  v a t a  a r e a s  o f  t h e  b o dy  r e s ul t i ng  i n  m e n t a l  c l a r i t y  a n d  c a l m n e s s .  
3r d b a s t i :  Draws a m a  f r om  t h e  p i t t a ar e as  o f  th e  bo d y , es p ec i al l y  t h e  ly mp h  ( r as a)  an d  b l o o d  ( r akt a)  t i s s ue s . 
Th e re  is  g r e at e r  s t r e n g th  an d v i t al i t y  as  r as a is  p ur i f i ed  an d i mp r ov e d s ki n  t on e an d  c o l o ur  as  r akt a i s  
p ur i f i e d .  
4t h basti : Dr aw s  t o x i ns  f r o m  th e  kap h a ar e as  o f  t h e  b o dy , es pe c ially  th e  m us c le  tiss ue  (m am s a).  
5t h basti : Dr aw s  t o x i ns  f r o m  th e  kap h a ar e as  o f  t h e  b o dy  es pe c i al l y  t h e  ad i po se / f at  t i ss ue  ( m ed a) .  
6t h basti : Dr aw s  t o x i ns  f r o m  b o ne  t i ss ue  an d  b al an c es  v at a ( a s t h i ) .  
7t h basti : Dr aw s  t o x i ns  f r o m  th e  bo n e  m ar r o w  an d  ne rve  tiss ue  ( med a ) . 
8t h b a s t i :  Dr aw s  t o x i ns  f r o m  th e  r ep r o d uc t i v e  t is s ue  ( s h u k r a ) .  
 
 65 Stage six – rejuvenation therapy ( rasayana ) 
 
After the main Panchakarma  therapies rejuvenating herbal preparations are prescribed to strengthen the 
immune system and increase vitality in the mind and body. Rasayana  herbs are often nourishing herbs rather 
than cleansing herbs and can be difficult to digest if the body is suffering from an overload of toxins or if the 
digestion is weak. Thus, the best time to take these powerful herbal formulas is after a course of Panchakarma 
treatments when the body has been cleansed and the digestion is functioning optimally. They are then able to be 
fully digested, assimilated and metabolized and able to exert their full potential. Rasayana  formulas  may be 
taken for several months and the specific formulas chosen will depend on your predominant Ayurvedic body -
type or the energy, tissue, system or organ of the body that needs to be strengthened and balanced.  
 
There are many traditional rasayanas ; some nourish the tissues,  some are rejuvenating, some strengthen the 
immune system, some increase strength, vitality and stamina, some balance the nervous system and some 
strengthen the reproductive system . The most common rasayana  h er b s  include : 
 
• Ashwagandha  w hic h pacifies and balances vata 
• Amalaki  which improves clarity of mind while also balancing both pitta and vata  
• Brahmi and Manjista w hic h p a c i f y  pitta 
• Turmeric for purifying the blood, eliminating excess mu cus and soothing sore throats  
• Ginger, black pepper and Pippali w hic h improve the digestion and pacify kapha  
• Aloe Vera which cleanses the  liver and  blood and is good for balancing pitta 
• Licorice for balancing Vata 
• Peppermint for  balancing Pitta and Kapha  
• Cinnamon, cayenne, ginger and clov e for removing ama 
 
However, one of the most truly magnificent Rasayanas  is Chywanaprash or Amrit Kalash which has been used 
in India as an elixir of life for thousands of years . Scientific studies have now shown that this amazing formula  
has very powerful  antioxidants properties and the ability to arrest and improve many of our modern day 
diseases such as cancer and auto-immune disorders.  Chywanaprash  is meticulously prepared with up to fifty 
different herbal compounds and has one of the highest concentra tions of vitamin C in any natural product.  It 
balances all three doshas and can be taken on a daily basis to strengthen the physiology and protect the immune 
system.                  
 
 66 Stage seven – post treatment  
 
After undergoing Panchakarma treatments i t is imperative that we graduate  slowly back to a ’normal’ lifestyle;  
hopefully with some healthy additions.  This ensures that the delicate state of the nervous system at this time is 
not over -stimulated, the tissues are able to re -build themselves proper l y  and energy levels rise sufficiently to 
cope with the increase in metabolism necessary for everyday activities. Failing to do this can lead to a drain in 
energy levels and an increased strain on the immune system – and we end up feeling worse than we did before.  
 
It is also important that we follow the ‘Ideal Daily Routin e’ of waking, sleeping, eating at the proper times, 
consuming the right foods for our body -type and integrating exercise, yoga, massage, herbal teas and meditation 
into our daily program .   I f  w e  f i n i s h a ten or fourteen -day detox and then jump straight on the plane or into a 
stressful office or domestic situation we halt the delicate process of renewal and revitalization before it has had 
chance to fully carry out it’s re -integration phas e.  We then wonder why we feel so tired and become prone to 
colds and flu more easily , rather than feel energized and healthy.  Once  we fully understand the profound power 
of Ayurveda , and especially p anchakarma , we take the time to complete the process fully and thereby transform 
our physiological and psychological resources into storehouses of immense strength and resilience.  
 
Ideally , after panchakarma,  we should take at least a week to progress slowly back into our normal daily routine 
before we face th e world head on again, just the same as we would take a little time to adjust to the day ahead 
after waking from a deep sleep or when coming out of a profou ndly peaceful meditation.  For p anchakarma to 
be successful we need time to assimilate the benefits and regain our energy levels – we should avoid undue 
mental and physical stress, late nights, excessive travel, strenuous exercise, prolonged sunbathing, cold water, 
cold or rainy weather and sexual activity for a least a week following the last treatment.  If these guidelines are 
diligently applied we support and enhance the effects of the panchakarma therapies and assist the body in 
concentrating  its energy on complete  rejuvenation and revitalisation.  
 
We should also follow a light, nutritious, vegetarian diet of pulses, grains, fruits and vegetables to ensure that 
digestive system is restored to maximum efficiency and able to eliminate toxins from the body.  Once the 
digestion is working at full strength the food we eat will be properly digested, assimilat ed and metabolised.  
This will ensure that metabolic toxins, ama and fat are not deposited within the body. We can then be confident 
that we are doing our best to remain relatively free from future disease or illness and will be better equipped to 
enjoy li fe to the full with optimal health, joy and vitality.  
 
Finally it should be noted that while Panchakarma may be very successful in alleviating symptoms of disease, 
its real goal is to eliminate their cause.  An absence of symptoms does not necessarily indi cate a complete cure - 
symptoms of disease can often be eliminated or subdued but a complete cure often takes much longer. It is 
generally accepted that if a person’s disease has been slowly manifesting over a number of years it will take at 
least the same  amount of time to completely reverse the damage done and obtain complete relief.  To effect real 
long-lasting change the person  must also review and alter diet, lifestyle, stress levels and negative mental 
attitudes, behaviour and emotions in order to era dicate the core and true cause of his illness . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 67  
Foods to a void on a panchakarma detox  
 
 
 
 
 
It is important to avoid the following foods, drinks and condiments during the detox program. They have the 
potential to jeopardise your health when your di gestive system is undergoing detoxification. They are hard for 
the body to digest when the system is attempting to flush out toxins (metabolic waste).  
 
 
 
Bottled drinks  
Canned drinks  
Confectionary  
Deep -fried food  Frozen food  
Left-over food  
Microwaved food  
Processed food  Refined food  
Tinned food  
Uncooked food  
Yeast products  
Alcohol  
Carbonated drinks  Coffee  
Milk  Pasteurised juices  
Tea 
 
Citrus  
Dairy  
Fish 
Meat  Seafood  
Sour fruit  
Salads  
Whole nuts  Un-ground seeds  
Very hot spices  
Soya/tofu  
Yoghurt
 
Avocado  
Bananas  
Brussels sprouts  
Cabbage  
Cauliflower  
Chillies  Lettuce  
Garlic  
Horseradish  
Hot peppers  
Melons  
Mushrooms  Olives  
Onions/leeks  
Potatoes  
Parsnips  
Turnips  
Tomatoes  
 
Ketchup  
Mayonnaise  
Soya sauce  Tamarind sauce  
Salad cream  
Sugar  Salt (in excess)  
Pickles  
Vinegar
Brown rice               Pa s t a      Br ead
 68 Pre & post -treatment meal routines  
 
 
 
Pre – detox recommendations:  twelve days before a panchakarma detox it is beneficial to start 
graduating towards a light diet as this gives the digestive system a rest a nd starts the process of cleansing 
the body of toxins and accumulated metabolic waste. This helps maximise and enhance the detoxification 
procedures.  
 
 
Breakfast:   Porridge oats with hot milk     Days 1 - 3 
Toast with ghee & honey      Days 4 - 6 
Stewed apple s & dates      Days 7 - 9 
Vegetable juice (carrot, apple & ginger etc)    Days 10 - 12 
 
Drinks (am):   Ginger tea, lemon tea or vata tea     Every day
  
Lunch:    Trikatu (two tablets) or ‘ginger pickle’  (see reci pes)  Every day  
Any grain, vegetables and sauce  with small side salad  Days 1 - 6 
Any grain, vegetables and sauce     Days 7 - 12 
 
Drinks (pm):   Post-digestive tea, fennel tea, vata tea, ginger tea   Every day  
 
Evening meal:   Red lentil s oup with herbs & vegetables    Days 1 - 8 
   Mung dhal s oup with herb s & vegetables    Days 9 - 12 
 
Drinks (ev):   Almond energy, rajas cup, vata tea     Every day  
Before bed:   Triphala (two tablets)      For one month  
 
 
Post – detox recommendations:  twelve days after a panchakarma detox it is beneficial to start graduating 
towards a more normal and heavier, nourishing diet as this kick starts the digestion  again and helps 
maximise and enhance the detoxification procedures.  
 
Breakfast:   Vegetable juice (carrot, apple & ginger etc)    Days 1 - 3 
Stewed apples & dates      Days 4 - 6 
Toast with ghee & honey      Days 7 - 9 
Porridge oats with hot milk     Days 10 - 12 
 
Drinks (am):   Ginger tea, lemon tea or vata tea     Every day
  
Lunch:    Trikatu (two tablets) or ‘ginger pickle’  (see reci pes)  Every day  
Any grain, vegetables and sauce     Days 1 - 6 
Any grain, vegetables and sauce  with small side salad  Days 7 - 12 
 
Drinks (pm):   Post-digestive tea, fennel tea, vata tea, ginger tea   Every day  
 
Evening meal:   Mung dhal s oup with herbs & vegetables    Days 1 - 8 
Red lentil s oup with herbs & vegetables    Days 9 - 12 
    
Drinks (ev):   Almond energy, rajas cup, vata tea     Every day  
Before bed:   Triphala (two tablets)      For one month  
 69 Castor oil  
 
 
 
Castor oil , also known as Eranda,  is extracted  from the castor plant (ricinus commonus) and is native to 
Africa and India.  It is an ancient medicinal herb  and is classified in Ayurveda as sweet and astringent 
with anti -rheumatic, analgesic and anti -inflammatory properties. It pacifies vata, liquefies excess kapha 
and alleviates pitta problems. Appli ed externally it easily penetrates, cools and softens the skin, 
supporting growth and strengthening underlying connective tissue. Taken internally, it is purgative, 
demulcent, anti -flatulent, emetic, mild ly expectorant, strengthening and rejuvenative. It pacifies  all seven 
dhatus and promotes metabolism and assimilation by enkindling the digestive fires of all the tissues whilst 
simultaneously cleansing waste products or burning ama. It should not be used in cases of diverticulitis, 
ulcerative colitis, diar rhoea, Crohn's disease and pregnancy.  
 
Castor oil is vata and pitta pacifying and thus helps improve the condition and strength of nerve tissue.  It 
increases intellect, promotes clarity of mind and induces calmness while also acting as a topical analgesi c 
for neuralgia and sciatica. One or two drops placed in the eyes at night will help with conjunctivitis and 
sties.  
 
Castor oil applied to the skin is rejuvenating and helps heal bruises. A paste made from castor oil and 
baking soda is good for moles and warts and a castor oil, ghee and neem powder mix (ratio of 4:4:1) helps 
with cases of eczema, fungal infection and herpes zoster.  It improves complexion by pacifying pitta 
dosha and, used during massage, is excellent for gout, lumbago, stiffness, aches and  strains. As a remedy 
for hiccups an equal mix of honey and castor oil is made and ¼ teaspoon taken every 15 seconds for two 
to three minutes.  Castor oil  packs or compresses on the abdomen will help tone and strengthen the colon 
and reduce soreness or swel ling and promote menstrual flow. Castor oil mixed with flax oil and mustard 
oil may be used to massage mastic tissue to reduce fibrocystic accumulations. Castor oil massaged into 
the perineum is good for prostate or cervical problems.  
 
Ingesting castor oi l after childbirth facilitate s the production of breast milk.  For problems relating to the 
joints taking two teaspoons of Castor oil with ginger tea at night will help release toxins and promote 
strength and flexibility. It will help remove ama and improve  the functioning of the colon and, as it is 
through this organ that the minerals vital to the nourishment of bone tissue (asthi dhatu)  are absorbed, it 
will help rectify disorders related to the skeletal system.  
 
To improve digestion, ma intain a healthy co lon and maximize the assimilation and metabolism of 
nutrients to the tissues it is recommended that, once ever y three months , the colon is cleansed using a 
strong purgative – castor oil fulfils this role.  It clears accumulated mucus, waste and toxins from  the 
intestinal tract by promoting strong peristaltic movements followed by a series of loose bowel move ments 
over the next few hours.  
 
Instructions  for taking castor oil : 
• Warm 30mls of castor oil (by immersing the container in hot water or by placing on a  radiator).  
• Take a  hot bath at 7am – make sure the head is kept cool.  
• Drink the castor oil and then suck on a  piece of orange, lemon or lime to prevent nausea  and take 
away any lingering taste. Drink plenty of ginger tea until you have the urge to eliminat e. 
• Elimination will usually happen in 1 -4 hours (usually 3 -10 movements). Stop taking liquids for 
the next hour.  
• Do not eat until you feel hunger and then have a watery rice soup only for the first meal. The 
evening meal should be a thicker rice soup and t he meals on the following day should be dhal 
soup ( kicharee).  
 
 70 Ghee  
 
 
 
Ghee is cow’s butter from which the water and milk solids have been removed and can be used for frying herbs, 
sautéing vegetables and spreading on toast. Ghee is oilier than butter an d very health promoting; it has a long shelf life 
and a beautiful flavour. It pacifies all three doshas , strengthens and protects bodily tissue, improves memory, increases 
mental clarity, promotes stamina, stimulates digestion, produces a healthy complexio n and aids rejuvenation and 
longevity. If taken in moderation (1 -2 tsp) with each meal it enhances the digestive process but over two tablespoons 
per day, especially for a Kapha body type, will clog the system and subdue the digestive fire. In Ayurveda it is often 
used as a vehicle to carry herbs into the body; it enhances the absorption of beneficial chemicals and antioxidants into 
the lipid -permeable cell membranes.  Applied to the eyes, especially during the Ayurvedic treatment of Netra Tarpana, 
it can h elp rectify many eye problems and on burns it helps cool, heal and repair damaged tissue.  
 
Over the past few decades we have been led to believe that all fats  are detrimental to health and that they all promote 
fat production and weight gain.  Scientific r esearch has shown that some fatty acids are in fact very beneficial for the 
body while others are absolutely essential. Fats can be saturated or unsaturated. Saturated fats contain either long -
chain or sho rt -chain fatty acids. Long -chain fatty acids may no t be totally digested and metabolised by the body and 
frequent digestion of products which contain them, primarily meat and dairy may, in the long term, lead to excess 
acidity in the body which can result in cancer, arthritis, rheumatism and thrombosis. Ho wever, short -chain fatty acids 
are digested, assimilated, absorbed, and metabolised very easily and help the body release energy.  
 
Similarly, unsaturated fatty acids, are either monounsaturated or polyunsaturated. Monounsaturated fats are very 
healthy  w hil e the polyunsaturated are not. This is due to the kind of chemical bonds these fats form  - monounsaturated 
fats form single bonds and polyunsaturated fats form multiple bonds and this is where oxidation takes place during 
heating  or processing causing the fat to become toxic. Foods fried in polyunsaturated fatty acids (sunflower, 
cornflower etc) bec ome oxidized and toxic; they lo se electrons (free radicals) and change the chemical structure of the 
oil. The se free radicals are believed to be the primary caus e of most cancers and chronic diseases prevalent in the 
world today.  As the majority of vegetable oils contain predominantly polyunsaturated fatty acids it is not advisable to 
use them for cooking.  Sesame oil , ghee and coconut are an exception as they co ntain  powerful antioxidants and 
doesn’t become toxic on heating.  
 
Margarine is particularly unhealthy as it is hydrogenated and contains a large percentage of trans -fatty acids.  These 
acids, which are chemically altered during processing, are synthetic; t hey do not occur in a natural form and are 
therefore unrecognisable to the body. They have been shown to be associated with heart disease and to increase low -
density lipoprotein (the bad cholesterol) just as saturated fats do. However, p redominantly monoun saturated fatty 
acids, such as olive oil, mustard oil, canola oil, and rapeseed oil are associated with the prevention of many diseases 
including heart disease and cancer. Ghee contains 25% monounsaturated fatty acids and only 5% polyunsaturated fatty 
acids. It contains saturated fats but most of these are short -chain fatty acids with only 10% long -chain fatty acids. As a 
healthy diet requires and a consumption of both saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, ghee is excellent as part of our 
daily diet as it contains around 65% saturated fats, most of which are short -chain fatty acids. Ghee is a good source of 
vitamins A, D, E, and K whilst also having anti -carcinogenic and antioxidant properties perhaps due to its linoleic acid 
content.  
 
Instructions for ing esting ghee as part of a Panchakarma detox  (only if instructed by your Ayurvedic practitioner) : 
• Take a hot bath at 7am.  
• Melt the ghee (30mls etc) by placing on a radiator or in  hot water until fully liquid.  
• Drink the ghee and then suck on an orange segment  to take away the residual taste if desired.  
• If you feel very nauseous or have very loose bowel moveme nts soon after taking the ghee d o not take the 
next day’s ghee and have a day of rest instead.  
• Drink fennel, vata or barley tea to enhance the detoxificat ion process and ease any feelings of discomfort.  
 
 71 Maintaining good health  
 
 
After Panchakarma therapy our digestion is stronger, the mind is less tired and stressed, the immune 
system is better able to cope with the demands placed on it and our energy lev els are increased. However, 
if we wish to maintain this more healthy and vibrant state we should adapt our diet and lifestyle 
accordingly. Below are some of the best ways to maintain the benefits of your panchakarma detox and 
enhance your long -term health:  
 
 
• Eat your main meal at midday when the digestion is strong and enzymatic activity is high. This will 
ensure that you obtain maximum nutritional value from the food you ingest.   
• Eat organic, wholesome food which is high in nutritional value and energy.  
• Eat lightly in the evening  so that you are able to process and eliminate toxins during the night.  
• Drink  sufficient quantities of wa t er , especially hot water, to aid digestion and lubricate the body.  
• Take herbal digestives, rejuvenative herbal formulas, ghee  and Omega oils as part of your daily diet.  
• Reduce the use of refined white sugar, salt and white flour.  
• Eat less hard cheese, red meat, confectionary, proce ssed food, refined food and micr o-waved food.  
• Reduce the intake of tea, coffee and alcohol.  
• Leave a t least three hours between meals to allow proper and complete digestion of the previous meal.  
• Meditate twice a day to increase mental clarity and balance the nervous system.  
• Practice yoga asanas to calm the mind and improve strength, suppleness and flexib ility. 
• Exercise daily to increase circulation, help assimilate nutrients and eliminate metabolic waste products.  
• Oil massage each morning to pacify vata, balance the nervous system and remove waste products, ama 
and impurities that have accumulated during the previous day.  
• Do not sleep in the day time as this causes the body to store toxins and become stiff and sluggish.  
• Do not eat within three hours of retiring to bed or sleep will be unsettled and digestion impaired.  
• Be in bed before 10pm as this allows th e mind and body to be purified, renewed, revitalised and 
repaired during the pitta time of night (10pm to 2am).  
• Awake at dawn (vata time) to imbibe the vibrant and vital energy that is prevalent at this special time.  
• Try not to wake or get up after dawn as  this will allow the influence of kapha  to take hold and cause 
tiredness and sluggishness later in the day. Whilst sleep is the body’s greatest healer, if it is of a low 
quality due to  ignoring these natural rhythms and sleeping outside of these hours, the  lack of proper 
sleep will eventually lead to low energy levels and a build up of ama in the phy siology .  
• Spend time each day walking in nature and enjoying the countryside. The life energy or prana  emitted 
by the natural environment renews the energy deple ted by our urban environment.  
• Have some quiet time to yourself each day to settle the mind and balance the nervous system.  
• Maintain the company of like -minded people and reduce contact with stressful people.  
 
As negative thought patterns, especially fear, guilt and anger, are the primary cause of disease and stress 
we should try and reduce their hold on us by following as many of the above recommendations as we are 
capable of. Some may seem easy to implement and these should be the ones we start with first.  Once we 
have fully integrated them into our daily routine and are reaping their benefits we will then have the 
strength and courage to implement others. Thus, as time goes by, our lives become healthier and happier 
and we begin to experience and enjoy the  beauty around us.  
 72  Panchakarma therapies  
 
 
 
During the various stages of a Panchakarma detox a variety of treatments will be given. They involve  the 
application of warm, herbalised oil through the medium of massage. Many of the massage therapies last 
over an hour and are harmoniously administered by two therapists working in tandem, one on either side 
of the body. The aromatic oils help loosen and dislodge toxins and impurities stored within the deeper 
tissues. Massage therapies may be followed by a secon d treatment; either svedana - a herbal steam 
therapy which dilates bodily channels and mobilises impurities trapped within them - or Shirodhara which 
relaxes the mind and pacifies the energy of vata dosha.  
 
The p rimary  oil used in the massage treatment i s Sesame oil which has been shown to have powerful anti -
carcinogenic, anti -melan oma and antioxidant effects. I ts potency is increased by a special ‘curing’ process 
and by infusing the oil with a decoction of Ayurvedic herbs.  The type of massage selected and  the depth 
and speed of the massage depends on your Ayurvedic constitution ( prakruti ) or imbalance.  
 
Abhyanga:   A full body massage usually administered by two technicians working in perfect synchrony 
on either side of your body. Warm, herbalised sesame o il is lovingly and soothingly applied in a 
continuous flowing sequence to relax and balance the physiology. The oil penetrates the pores of the skin 
and subcutaneous adipose tissues and loosens  impurities and toxins  which have accumulated there. The 
massag e may last for over an hour depending on the speed and depth chosen to suit your Ayurvedic body -
t y p e .  
 
Other b enefits : 
• Balances  all three doshas; vata, pitta and kapha  
• Promote flexibility and suppleness  
• Increases strength, energy and vitality  
• Improves  the quality of sleep  
• Increases softness and lustre of the skin  
• Reduces the signs of aging (rejuvenating)  
• Decreases stress, anxiety and fear and balances the mind and emotions  
 
Shiro Abhyanga:   A head, face, shoulder and upper back massage which is often given before 
Abhyanga. Coconut oil is used on the head as it cools and softens the skin and is strengthening and 
nourishing to the hair.  
 
Other b enefits : 
• Balances  all three doshas; vata, pitta and kapha  
• Calms the mind  
• Improves the quality of sleep  
• Helps alleviat e disorders of the nervous system  
 
Vishesh:   An invigorating sports -type massage with firm, kneading actions to help promote the release of 
deep-seated imbalances, toxins and impurities.   It is especially helpful for soothing sore, tired or aching 
muscles.   
 
Other b enefits : 
• Balances  all three doshas; vata, pitta and kapha  
• Promotes weight loss  
• Relaxes the mind  
• Lubricates and increases flexibility in the joints  
 
 73  
 
 
 
Pizzichilli:   A unique relaxation experience – two therapists slowly and gently massage and ba the the 
body in gallons of warm aromatic sesame oil for up to one hour.  Aches and pains, cares and worries are 
effortlessly released in a continuous flow of liquid golden nectar.  
 
Other b enefits : 
• Pacifies vata  
• Lubricates and thereby alleviates pain and pr omotes flexibility in the  joints  
• Alleviates pain and soothes tired, aching or sore muscles  
• Moisturises and softens the skin  
 
Udvartana:   A fast, vigorous massage with a coarse herbal paste of barley and chickpea flour. It enlivens 
and energises the body he lping promote better digestion, healthier skin and firmer muscle tone.  
 
Other b enefits : 
• Reduces access ama  
• Pacifies Kapha  
• Increases circulation to the subcutaneous tissues  
• Defoliates and cleanses the skin  
• Breaks  down fatty deposits and cellulite and helps with weight loss  
 
Shirodhara:   This amazingly relaxing therapy gently releases stress and tension from the mind and body; 
it often accompanies Abhyanga or Vishesh.  A steady stream of warm, aromatic oil flows rhythmically 
across the forehead calming the mi nd and soothing the nervous system.  
 
Other benefits:  
• Balances vata 
• Promotes deep relaxation  
• Harmonises  the h o r m o n a l  s y s t e m  
• Relaxes  the nervous system  
• Improves complexion  
• Improves memor y  
• Good for headaches, migraine,  insomnia and mental stress  
• Good for high blood pressure, restlessness and anxiety  
 
Svedana:   A herbal steam treatment allowing the body to perspire while the head is kept cool.  
 
Benefits : 
• Releases toxins and cleanses the skin  
• Softens, soothes and moisturises the skin  
• Increases circulation and i mproves complexion  
• Soothes painful, stiff, sore and aching muscles and joints  
• Softens and dilates bodily channels (shrotas ) and increases circulation  
• Liquefies impurities hidden in minute channels  
• Reduces chest and sinus congestion  
• Helps with weight loss and is b alancing for Vata and Kapha  
• Good for constipation, earache, headache, asthma, chough , sciatica, dyspnoea, heaviness and 
neck pain  
• Stimulates , lightens  and invigorates the body through perspiration  
• Reduces stress and improves sleep patterns  
 
 74  
 
 
 
Mar ma:  This is a blissful healing and energy balancing therapy which works by stimulating the 108 
marma  (energy points ) on the body.  
 
Benefits : 
• Helps resolve emotional imbalances  
• Increased calmness and clarity in the mind  
• Increases confidence and feelings of  self-wor t h  
• Balances the nervous system  
 
Netra Tarpana:   This is a cleansing, soothing and cooling treatment for the eyes using warm, h er b a l i s e d  
ghee to gently bathe the eyes for five to ten minutes. It pacifies pitta and reduces heat, itching, tiredness, 
graininess and heaviness.  
 
Other b enefits : 
• Nourishes the nervous system  
• Removes impurities from the eyes  
• Strengthens the eyes and improves sight  
• Effective for 60% of eye -related problems including burning, dryness, itching and eyestrain  
 
Kati Basti:   Warm , herbalised oil is contained in a dough ring on the lower  back for up to  30 minutes . 
  
Benefits : 
• Balances vata 
• Helps relieve spinal problems  
• Helps joint problems  
• Improves the digestion  
• Calms the mind  and relives restlessness  
 
Nasya  therapy  (shirovirechana ): Herbalised powders, oils and herbs are administered via the nostril s to 
stimulate  the secretion of mucus and thereby dissolve and loosen mucus lodged in the nasal and sinus 
passages. A vigorous head massage, herbalised stream inhalation and warm towels a re applied to the head 
and face prior to this treatment.  It is often given before or after the main detox therapy and is usually 
administered in the morning ( kapha  time) as this is when kapha -related impurities (mucus) are naturally 
moved from the deeper t issues and orga ns to the stomach and sinuses.  
 
Benefits : 
• Increases oxygenation to the brain and eliminates  impurities from the head  and chest area  
• Removes ama and toxins from t he nose, sinuses, ears and eyes  
• Cleanses the shrotas  (channels) in the head  and improves the functioning of the senses  
• Improve brain function  and heightens sensory perception  
• Good for:  dry nasal passages, sinus congestion, cold, sinusitis, allergies, headaches, migraine, 
epilepsy, mental retardation, dry, itchy or watery eyes, conjunc tivitis, glaucoma, hearing loss, 
tinnitus, and loss of smell.   
 
 
 75  The seven dhatus  (bodily tissues)  
 
 
 
Whilst imbalances in the doshas ( vata, pitta and kapha ) are the cause of disease the dhatus  are the sites of 
disease. Our tissues are produced from the  food we eat - the waste material or by -product is expelled as 
feces and urine. Each tissue develops from the previous one in a progressive cycle from gross to subtle. 
Thus, from the grossest tissue, rasa (lymph or plasma) the second tissue, rakta  (blood),  is formed and 
from rakta, mamsa (muscle) is formed. From mamsa, meda (fat/adipose tissue) is formed, from meda, 
asthi  (bone) is formed, from asthi, majji  (bone marrow or nerve tissue) is formed and from majji, shukra  
(reproductive tissue) is formed. This process is similar to the production of cream from milk, butter from 
cream and ghee from butter – the special cooking of one leads to the formation of the other.  
Thus, from the basic plasma of the body, rasa (lymph), all the other tissues of the body are p roduced – 
each is produced from the proper digestion of the other and problems in any one tissue tend to cause 
problems in the rest.  Also, the more subtle tissues support the grosser tissues and store their concentrated 
energy. Thus blood is concentrated p lasma, muscle is concentrated blood and fat is concentrated muscle. 
The grosser tissues (plasma, blood and muscle) are larger in quantity as only a portion of each is 
converted into the next more subtle tissue, with reproductive tissue being the subtlest a nd most 
concentrated and enduring. It takes thirty -five days for the food we eat to work its way through the seven 
tissues to become reproductive tissue. As reproductive tissue is the essence of our life -energy and upholds 
all the other tissues we need to be extra careful that this tissue doesn’t become depleted.  
 
Plasma ( rasa): This tissue is composed mainly of water and is that which all the other tissues of the 
body are suspended. When properly maintained it helps nourish all the other tissues in the bod y ,  
providing adequate hydration and electrolyte balance. It is the container for kapha  in the body and i t s 
main sites are the skin, heart, blood vessels, lymphatic system and mucus membranes. When there is an 
excess of plasma , kapha  increases and we become  prone to accumulations of saliva and phlegm, loss of 
appetite, nausea, congestion, cysts and benign tumo urs. When plasma is deficient we are more prone to 
rough skin, cracked, dry lips, dehydration, lethargy, tremors, palpitations, pain and feelings of em ptiness. 
If we maintain plasma in an optimal state we have a healthy, glowing complexion with soft, smooth skin 
and luxurious, shining hair. Balanced plasma tissue creates vitality, stamina, compassion, contentment, 
pleasure and a happy disposition general l y .  It can be strengthened by drinking adequate amounts of 
liquid, especially fruit and vegetable juices and in particular lemon and lime juice with a little salt. 
Organic dairy products and particularly organic, unpasturised milk is also good.  
 
Blood ( rakta): This tissue is composed of fire and water and provides oxygen to the tissue cells. It is 
the container for pitta in the body. Excess blood creates skin diseases, abscesses, fevers, inflammation, 
bleeding disorders, enlarged liver and spleen, hypertens ion, jaundice, weak digestion and burning or 
redness in the eyes, skin and urine. Deficient states cause pallor, low blood press ure, rough, dry skin and 
desire  for cold, sour food. In its optimal state is gives rise to a healthy glowing complexion and warm  
skin, clearness in the eyes, vitality, love, faith and a passion for life. It can be strengthened through eating 
iron-rich foods such as black grapes, molasses, carrots and beetroot.  
 
Muscle ( mamsa ):   This is a heavy, predominately kapha tissue and makes  up much of the bulk of the 
body – it is composed primarily of the earth element and serves to bind it together whilst giving it 
strength for action. In excess it creates swelling or tumours in the muscles, heaviness and swelling in the 
glands, obesity, en larged liver, irritability and anger. It can also impair sexual vitality and cause fibroids 
and miscarriage in women. When deficient it creates emaciation, fatigue, lack of co -ordination, fear, 
insecurity and unhappiness. In its optimal state we have good muscle development and co -ordination, 
mental and physical strength, courage, confidence, openness, forgiveness and integrity. Muscle is fortified 
with proteins from grains, beans, nuts and meat.  
 
 76  
 
 
Fat ( meda ): This is another kapha tissue which is compose d mainly of water but is more refined 
type than plasma. It serves to lubricate the body (especially the muscles and tendons) and creates a feeling 
of being protected or ‘cared for’ – obesity is often the result of feeling unloved or uncared for; fat acts a s 
a psychological barrier or protection instead. In excess it also leads to fatigue, asthma, sexual debility, 
extreme thirst, hypertension, diabetes, sagging breasts, belly and thighs and lack of mobility. Emotionally 
it will lead to greed and attachment. Deficient states lead to brittle or weak hair, teeth, nails and bones, 
emaciation, enlarged spleen, cracking of the joints, tired eyes and general lethargy. Balanced fat tissue 
creates ideal body weight, mild oiliness of skin, hair and muscles, a melodious  voice, joy, humour and a 
loving, affectionate nature. It is kept in balance through judicious use of dairy products but more 
importantly through using ghee and organic, unrefined vegetable oils such as sesame, flax, sunflower, 
hemp and pumpkin oil.  
 
Bone (asthi ): This tissue is composed mainly of earth and air. It functions to support and uphold the 
other tissues – it gives them firmness and a strong foundation. Bone is the container for vata in the body  – 
it resides in the bone spaces.  In excess it can c reate bone spurs, extra teeth, pain in the joints, arthritis, 
bone cancer, gigantism, fear, anxiety and fatigue. When deficient it can create dwarfism, poor bone and 
teeth formation, low energy, falling of hair and teeth and looseness in the joints. When i n balance it gives 
stability, confidence, patience, security and stamina. It also gives strong, white teeth, a tall, strong frame 
with large joints and flexibility in movement of limbs. It is maintained through eating foods with high 
proportions of calcium , iron and zinc.  
 
Bone marrow and nerve tissue ( majja ): This kapha tissue has an element of earth but is mainly 
composed of a refined or subtle form of water, which has the power to convey nerve impulses. It provides 
for the secretion of synovial fluid and  for the lubrication of eyes, stool and skin. An excess of this tissue 
leads to heaviness in the eyes and limbs whilst a deficiency creates weakness or porosity of bones and 
pain in the joints. There can be dizziness and spots before the eyes, darkness aro und the eyes, sexual 
debility and feelings of anxiety and emptiness. When in balance, we have a sense of fulfillment and 
compassion in life, the mind is clear, sharp and sensitive, memory is strong and the senses are acute and 
perceptive. Also, the eyes ar e large and clear, the joints are strong, pain threshold is high and speech is 
strong. It is best maintained through the oils of butter, ghee, nuts and seeds.  
 
Reproductive tissue ( shukra ): This is again a kapha tissue and is the essential or causal form o f 
wa t er  – it has the power to create new life. In excess we are prone to anger and unhealthy sexual desires, 
semen stones, inflammation of the prostrate and cysts in the ovaries and uterus. A deficiency leads to lack 
of vigour, lack of sexual desire, impot ence, dry mouth, lower back pain, lack of vaginal lubrication and 
slow, difficult ejaculation. Emotionally there can be fear, anxiety and a lack of love and compassion. 
When in balance the eyes are clear, the hair is lustrous and strong, sexual organs are well formed, the 
body is attractive and we exude a loving, charming, compassionate nature. This tissue is maintained 
through taking milk, raw sugar, ghee, nuts, seeds and eggs.  
 
 77 Panchakarma - FAQ  
 
 
Why do I need to eat a light vegetarian diet during my de tox? 
A light vegetarian diet allows your body to detox more efficiently and effectively. Your  digestive system uses a 
large  amount of energy when it has heavy foods to break down and digest. If less energy is spent on digesting food 
there is more energy av ailable to release metabolic wastes and toxins from your body. Animal products are very 
difficult to digest and are therefore strictly contra -indicated during a detox.  
Why is it important to also follow a light diet before and after my detox?  
A light diet before a detox helps prepare the body for the elimination of impurities. It ensures the body has energy 
available to thoroughly detox the body , which naturally begins clearing our waste products once conditions are 
favourable . It also ensures that the deto x progresses smoothly and effectively without shocking the body and causing 
a ‘healing crisis’ (a reaction to excessive toxins being released into the bloodstream and causing the liver to struggle 
to eliminate them properly). After a detox a light diet is important because it helps the digestive system gain strength 
and efficiency as it gradually increases its digestive capacity.  
Why are rice and dhal so beneficial during a detox?  
Rice and dhal are light and nutritious and are very easily digested. They tak e only small amounts of energy to be 
metabolised  which allows your body to have the energy it requires to det ox efficiently and effectively.  
Why do I need to take ghee during the Panchakarma detox?  
Ghee is similar in quality to the fat in your body. Howeve r, it has one the main difference ; it has no has no toxins or 
impurities stored in it. As toxins gradually build up in your fat tissues they become increasingly more likely to cause 
chronic health conditions . However, the ghee circulating in your bloodstre am during the early stages of the detox 
gradually dra ws them out ready for elimination . 
Won’t the ghee raise cholesterol and make me fat?  
No, quite the contrary. Taken in small amounts, especially as part of a panchakarma detox procedure, it will help 
reduce the ‘bad’ fat stored in your body and will therefore lead to weight loss rather than weight gain.  
Why is ghee taken very early in the morning?  
During the early morning your metabolism is very slow and sluggish so the ghee is digested very slowly . It sta ys 
circulating in the bloodstream for longer than it normally would and is therefore able to absorb toxins from the fat in 
your deeper tissues.  
Why do I need to take castor oil during the Panchakarma detox?  
Castor oil has a stimulating or ‘ contracting ’ effect on the colon and helps induce  peristalsis  – it therefore helps 
eliminate the toxins and metabolic wastes that have been drawn from the deeper tissues by the action of the ghee. It 
also cools and purifies the blood and liver and helps eliminate excess P itta (heat  or acidity ) from the body.  
Why do I need to take Trikatu or Ginger Pickle before meals?  
Trikatu and Ginger pickle are digestive aids that promote the production of digestive enzymes in your stomach – 
they enkindle the agni (digestive fire) and e nsure that the food you consume is fully digested. Trikatu is also very 
effective for burning ama (metabolic waste and toxins) which is the prime cause of all disease.  
Why do I need to take Triphala at bedtime?  
Triphala is an Ayurvedic herbal formula compo sed of three fruits (Haritaki, Bibhitaki and Amalaki). Together they 
help tone and strengthen your digestive tract and promote regular and complete evacuation of the bowels. They also 
help increase the digestion, absorption and assimilation of nutrients fr om the food you consume.  
Why is it important to drink hot water during a detox?  
Hot water in your body acts in a similar  way to hot water applied to your g r e a s y  pots and pans – it helps loosen and 
dissolve the dirt or impurities and melts the fatty deposit s. When it is c ombined with digestive herbs and fr esh  lemon 
juice it has an even stronger action. However, c old water will cause the fat in your body to congeal and harden and 
will therefore result in a lowering of your digestive power , increase d deposits of fat in your body  and excess weight . 
 
 78  
 
 
Why are bastis (enemas) so important to the success of the Panchakarma detox?  
The ancient Ayurvedic texts state that b astis or herbal enemas account for over 50% of the overall effectiveness of 
the whole Panchakar ma detox procedure. They nourish the colon and deeper tissues (bone and nerves) and help 
eliminate toxins and metabolic wastes from the body.  They not only release toxins from, but also penetrate and 
nourish, the lymph, blood, muscle, fat, bone, nerve and reproductive tissue. They cleanse and strengthen the entire 
endocrine, digestive and immune system and thereby cut off disease at its source.  
What is Rasayana therapy?  
Rasayana therapy is undertaken after your Panchakarma detox treatments to rejuvenate the  whole body. After your 
tissues and digestive tract have been cleansed your physiology is in a more pure and receptive state for herbal 
preparations to nourish and strengthen your deeper tissues and organs. There are many Rasayana formulas but three 
of the  most common are Ashwagandha, Shatavari and Chywanaprash and these are often recommended after a 
course of detox treatments.  
What is the purpose of the Ayurvedic massage therapies?  
Their primary purpose is to nourish and cleanse the deeper tissues through the application of specialised herbs and 
oils. Base oils, such as sesame, coconut, sunflower and olive oil, act as carriers for herbs which have been infused 
into them. These herbs target specific dhatus or tissues and rebalance Vata, Pitta and kapha, the energetic aspect of 
the body. The lighter, gentler massage therapies help balance the mind and nervous system whilst the deeper, more 
vigorous massage therapies serve to stimulate the mind and release deeper -seated toxins and impurities. However, 
the body will only release deeper -seated toxins once it is in a relaxed state and this is accomplished through the 
lighter massage therapies.  
Why can’t Ayurvedic massage therapies be administered in the evening?  
Massage therapies are contra -indicated in the evening  because your body is in a very sensitive, vulnerable and 
delicate stage at this time of day – this is especially so if you are undergoing intensive detox treatments. During 
daylight hours massage therapy facilitates the generation and release of energy in to your body. However, massage 
administered in the evening causes energy to be lost from your body – it depletes your body of vital nutrients and 
lowers the immune system . Furthermore, if  massage the rapy  is administered after eating , or before eating, your 
evening meal it will interfere with your digestive system and will cause ama (metabolic waste) and toxins to be 
created.  The person carrying out your massage therapy also suffer s in a similar way. Their digestive system will be 
compromised and they will s uffer from a lack of energy and a build up of toxins the following day. This will 
adversely affect the success of your detox treatments as your own energy will be drained  as a result . 
Why can’t I have massage treatments during the morning of my castor oil detox?  
Massage  therapy administered during the hours following purgation therapy with castor oil are contra -indicated 
because they will interfere with the detoxing that the castor oil has induced in your tissues. The detox process carries 
on for many hours , even after elimination has ceased , and it should be allowed to come to its natural conclusion for 
maximum benefits.  Also, the digestive fire is very weak at this time and even though the oil is applied to the skin, it 
penetrates to the deeper tissues and  needs to be digested.  
Why should I refrain from mental or physical activity (including sex) during my detox?  
The more energy your body has at it s disposal the more effective it is at flush ing out waste material s from your 
tissues. Your metabolic rate is r educed during the detox as the action of the ghee, castor oil and basti therapies lower 
your agni or digestive ‘fire’. Your body is in a sensitive state during detoxing so mental and  physical stimulation 
will result in energy being drawn away from the dige stive system and will therefore reduce the effectiveness of the 
detox.  
 79 Other Detox Options - Introduction  
 
 
 
The purpose of an Ayurvedic detox is to naturally and gently purify, rejuvenate and revitalise the body 
through the removal of toxins, impurities and metabolic waste (Ama).  Ama is undigested food and if th i s 
toxic residue is left in the body it interferes with the functioning of the tissues and leads to imbalance, 
illness and disease. This creates fatty deposits, water retention, excess weight, pain ful joints and cellulite.  
 
The goal of an Ayurvedic detox is to systematically release, melt, loosen, mobilise and eliminate these 
impurities from the body before they build -up and create more serious complaints in the areas they have 
lodged.  
 
A detox crea tes balance in the body whilst also nourishing and c leansing the intestinal tract. This results 
in more available energy for strengthening the immune system and maintaining the body in a state of 
relaxation, health and vitality.   
The detox diets on the fol lowing pages can be safely followed by most people. However, diabetics and 
people with sugar intolerances should consult a qualified medical practitioner before undertaking  the 
‘Lemon Detox’.  The diets can be tailored to your own preferences and time const raints – just choose a 
diet you feel comfortable with and try it for a few days. It is always advisable to start slow and build up.  
 
It is best to start with t he one or two days on the Mini D etox first. If this is comfortable , and leaves you 
feeling refres hed and energetic , build up to four or five days the next month. If you are happy on this diet 
try introducing the Dhal Detox for a couple of days the next month and on the following month try a five -
day Combination Detox. The options are endless but we’ve  given you a few ideas in the ‘Recommended 
Options’ page.  
 
 80 Mini Detox  
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The ‘Mini Detox’ is a light vegetaria n diet and can be followed  for one or two days each week to allow  the body to 
detox and flush out toxins and metabolic wastes which have accumulated in the blood, tissues and organs.  
 
Lunch  
 
Vegetables:   Asparagus , Butternut squash, Carrots , Celery , Eggplant, Fennel, Green beans, Mangetout, 
(choose three veg types)  Red pepper, Yellow Pepper, Spinach, Sweet Potato, Zucchini  
Grain:    Basmati rice, Buckwheat, Quinoa, Barley or Bulgarwheat  
Sauce:    Make by liquidising part of dhal or vegetable soup  
Condiments:   Vata or Pitta churna, rock salt and black pepper may be added after serving (to taste)  
Drink:    Digestive herbal tea  
 
Evening Meal  
 
Soup  Dhal or vegetable soup (butternut squash, asparagus, zucchini etc)  
Condiments:   Vata or Pitta churna, rock salt and black pepper may be added after serving (to taste)  
Drink:    Digestive herbal tea  
 
  
Morning  
 
7.00am:   Lemon tea  
8.00am:   Carrot & apple juice  
  Stewed fruit  
9.00am:   Ginger tea  
10.30am : Vata or Pitta tea  
12.30pm:  Trikatu tablets (2) or Ginger Pickle  
1.00pm:   Lunch  
  
Afternoon  
 
3.00pm:   Carrot & grape juice  
4.00pm   Vata or Pitta tea  
6.30pm:  Trikatu tablets (2) or Ginger Pickle  
7.00pm:   Evening meal  
8.30pm:   Vata tea  
9.00pm:   Bedtime tea  (1 cup)  
Triphala tablets (x2)  
 
 81 Dhal Detox  
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is more intense form of the Min i Detox  and can be followed for t wo to three days each month. This light  diet 
allows the body to flush out toxins and metabolic wastes even more efficiently and effectively because less energy is 
used for digesting heavier food and more energy is available  for detoxing.  
This detox can be greatly enhanced by also following the ‘ideal daily routine’ – arise at dawn, massage and then 
practice yoga and meditation. Yoga and meditation can also be practiced in the late afternoon. Try to rest or have a 
light workl oad on the days you are detoxing and retire to bed before 10pm.  
 
Lunch  
Soup:    Dhal soup  (with pureed butternut squash or asparagus)  
Cond iments:   Vata or Pitta churna, rock salt and black pepper may be added after serving (to taste)  
Drink:    Digestive herbal tea  
 
 
 Morning  
7.00am:   Lemon tea  
8.00am:   Carrot & apple juice  
9.00am:   Ginger tea  
10.30am : Vata or Pitta tea  
12.30pm:  Trikatu tablets (2) or Ginger Pickle  
1.00pm:   Lunch of dhal soup  
 Afternoon  
3.00pm:   Carrot & grape juice  
4.00pm   Vata or Pitta tea  
6.30pm:   Trikatu tablets (2) or Ginger Pickle  
7.00pm:   Evening meal of dhal soup  
8.30pm:   Vata tea  
9.00pm:   Bedtime tea  (1 cup)  
Triphala tablets (x2)  
 
Evening Meal  
Soup:    Dhal soup  
Condiments:   Vata or Pitta churna, rock salt and black pepper may be added after serving (to taste)  
Drink:    Digestive herbal tea  
Taking ghee : (this is an optional extra and shou ld only be added to your detox routine if prescribed by your Ayurvedic practitioner).  
• Measure out 25mls ghee, 35mls ghee and 50mls ghee into separate pots (order ghee at www.maharishi.co.uk).  
• Day 1: take 25mls of melted ghee. Day 2: take 35mls of melted gh ee. Day 3: take 45mls of melted ghee.  
• Melt the ghee on a radiator or place jar in hot water until fully melted.  Take at 6am each morning.  Suck on an 
orange segment to take away taste if desired.  
• Drink ginger, fennel or barley tea to ease any feelings of nausea if necessary.  
 82 Lemon Detox  
 
        
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
This is a purely liquid diet and is excellent for cleansing the kidneys and digestive system, eliminating waste and 
hardened material in the joints and muscles, relieving pressure and irritation in the nerves, arteries and blood vessels,  
keeping the skin soft, elastic and youthful, promoting weight loss and relieving constipation. It can be undertaken for 
one to five days every three or four months. The Lemon Detox is very easy to digest which is why it is so effective as 
part of a detox and weight loss program. It provides ample nutrition (vitamins and enzymes etc.) to keep the mind and 
body in peak condition with enough energy to maintain a normal daily routine.  
 
 
 
Lemon Detox Tea  
 
Squeeze half a lemon into a 10oz. glass and add one or two tablespoons of maple syrup and 1/8 teaspoon cayenne 
pepper. Top up glass with hot water and drink each time you feel hungry.  
 
 
Instructions  
 
For two days before you intend undertaking the ‘Lemon Detox’ avoid alcohol, tea, coffee, meat and dairy products.  
On the day before the ‘Lemon Detox’ follow the ‘Mini Detox’ or ‘Dhal Detox’.  
During the ‘Lemon Detox’ diet drink the tea whenever you feel h ungry (up to ten times a day if necessary).  
You may also drink plain hot water or Vata tea throughout the day to aid the cleansing process.  
On the day after the ‘Lemon Detox’ follow the ‘Mini Detox’ or ‘Dhal Detox’ for one or two days.  
 
 
Daily Routine  
 
8.00am:   Lemon Detox Tea   3.00pm   Lemon Detox Tea  
9.00am:   Vata tea     4.00pm   Vata tea  
10.00am:  Lemon Detox Tea   5.00pm   Lemon Detox Tea  
11.00am : Vata  tea    6.00pm   Vata tea  
12.00pm:  Lemon Detox Tea   7.00pm   Lemon Detox Tea  
1.00pm:  V a t a  T ea    8.00pm   Vata tea 
2.00pm:  Lemon Detox Tea   9.00pm   Triphala tablets (2 -4) 
 Combination Detox  
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This is a more intense and deeper detox which combines the Mini Detox, the Dhal Detox  
and the Lemon Detox. It can be undertaken for five to ten days every three to six months.   
 
 
5-day Combinat ion Detox  
 
Day 1:  Follow Mini Detox  
Day 2:  Follow Dhal Detox  
Day 3:  Follow Lemon Detox  
Day 4:  Follow Dhal Detox  
Day 5:  Follow Mini Detox  
 
 
10-day C ombination Detox  
 
Day 1:  Follow Mini Detox   Day 6:  Follow Lemon Detox  
Day 2:  Follow Mini Detox   Day 7:  Follo w Dhal Detox  
Day 3:  Follow Dhal Detox   Day 8:  Follow Dhal Detox  
Day 4:  Follow Dhal Detox   Day 9:  Follow Mini Detox  
Day 5:  Follow Lemon Detox   Day 10:  Follow Mini Detox  
 
 84  Recommended Detox Options  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Weekly Detox  
 
Option   Detox type   Duration  
 
1.  Mini Detox   1 day  
2.  Dhal Detox   1 day 
3.  Lemon Detox   1 day  
 
Follow one of these detox options each week  
 
Monthly Detox  
 
Option   Detox type   Duration  
 
1.  Mini Detox   3 days  
2.  Dhal Detox   3 days  
3.  Lemon Detox   3 days  
 
Follow one of these detox options each month  
 
Three Month Detox  
 
Option   Detox type   Duration  
 
1.  Mini Detox   5 days  
2.  Dhal Detox   5 days  
3.  Lemon Detox   5 days  
4.  Combination Detox  5 days  
 
 
Follow one of these detox options every three months  
 
 
 
Six Month Detox  
 
Option   Detox type   Duration  
 
1.  Mini Detox   7 days  
2.  Dhal Detox   7 days  
3.  Lemon Detox   7 days  
4.  Combination Detox  10 days  
5.  Panchakarma Detox  10 days  
 
Follow one of these detox options every six months  
 85  Healthy drinks  
 
 
If you wish to follow a healthy daily routine of liquid intake throughout the year the recommendation below may  be 
followed. However, it is best to consult an Ayurvedic p ractitioner who will be able to tailor it to your own specific body 
type or imbalance and also to the season of the year.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
Most of the herbs and teas mentioned in this pack can be purchased from either:  
 www.maharishi.co.uk (UK)  
www.mapi.com (USA)  
  
Time   Activity    D r i nk     C up s  
 
Morning  
6-7am  On waking   Lemon Tea    1-2 
7-8am  Before breakf ast  Carrot & apple juice   1-2 
8-9am  After breakfast   Ginger or mint tea   
 1-2 
9-12pm   During the morning  Rajas Cup with Almond Energy  1-2 
     Kapha or Pitta tea   1-2 
L un c h  
1-2pm  After lunchtime meal  Digest tea or Pitta tea   1 
 
Afternoon  
2-6pm  In the afternoons   Rajas Cup with Almond Energy  1-2 
     Vata tea     1-2 
     Carrot & apple juice   1-2 
Evening  
6-7pm  After evening meal  Digest tea    1 
7-10pm   In the evening   Slumber Time tea    1 
     Vata tea     1 
     Rajas Cup (made with milk)  1 

 86 Chapter 4 
Ayurvedic  herb s & oils 
~ a glossary of terms & home remedies for health & longevity ~  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"When you plant lettuce, if it does not grow well, you don't blame the lettuce.   
You look for rea sons it is not doing well.   It may need fertilize r, or more water, or less sun.   
You never blame the lettuce. Yet if we have problems with our friends or fam ily, we blame the other person.  
But if we know how to take care of them, they will  grow well, like the lettuce.  
Blaming has no positive effect at all, nor does trying to pers uade using reason and argument.  
That is my experience.   No blame, no reasoning, n o argument, just understanding.  
If you understand, and you show that you understand, you can love, a nd the situation will change."  
~ Thich Nhat Hanh  ~ 
(Vietnamese Zen Master ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 87 Classification of he rbs used in Ayurveda  
 
 
Herbs used in Ayurveda are classified according to their taste (rasa), their energetic effect (virya), their post -digestive 
effect (vipaka) and their post -digestive effect (prabhava).  The initial taste (rasa) indicates the properties it possesses and 
the therapeutic effects it will have. Thus, a bitter, astringent taste will have a very different action on the body than a 
sweet , sour taste or a spicy, pungent taste.  
Sweet taste  is composed of earth and water and is represented in sugars and starches. It balances vata and pitta, 
increases ojas and promotes growth in the body. It nourishes and revitalises the body and creates cont entment in the 
mind.  It is found in almonds, dates, raisins, honey, fennel, licorice, sesame seeds, marshmallow and slippery elm.  
Sour taste  is composed of earth and fire and is present in fermented or acidic substances. It is heating and increases 
digest ive power by enkindling agni, the digestive fire. It balances vata, enlivens the mind, increases strength, reduces 
bloating and gas and promotes salivation. Typically sour substances are lemon, lime, raspberry and  alcohol.  
Salty taste  is composed of water and fire and is present in salty substances and alkalis. It balances vata, increases agni, 
acts as a sedative and laxative and promotes salivation. Salt is found in kelp, seaweed, celery, Irish moss, sea salt and 
rock salt.  
Pungent taste  is composed of fir e and air and is present in most spicy, acrid or aromatic substances. It stimulates the 
digestion, increases appetite, acts as an expectorant, increases circulation, promotes clarity of mind, kills worms, 
alleviates kapha, reduces weight, clears obstructio ns, opens vessels and relieves blood stagnation. Pungent herbs and 
spices include; asafoetida, basil, black pepper, cardamom, cayenne, cinnamon, cloves, coriander, cumin, eucalyptus, 
garlic, ginger, horseradish, mustard, onions, oregano, peppermint, rosema ry, sage and thyme.  
Bitter  taste  is composed of air and ether and balances pitta and kapha. It is detoxifying, antibacterial and anti -
inflammatory. It also cleanses the blood and liver, stimulates the digestive fire and scrapes away fat. It is present in 
bitter herbs and foods such as aloe, dandelion, echinacea, rhubarb, yarrow and yellow dock.  
Astringent taste  is composed of earth and air and is present in food and herbs of a constricting nature. It balances pitta 
and kapha, stops diarrhoea, stops bleeding , heals wounds, stops sweating and is anti-inflammatory. Astringent 
substances include black tea, beans, mullein, pomegranate, raspberry leaves and witch hazel.  
Virya  is the energy or potency of a herb or spice and can be heating or cooling. It indicates t he effect the substance will 
have on pitta dosha. Sweet, astringent and bitter tastes are cooling whilst salt, sour and pungent are heating. Heating 
herbs increase pitta but reduce vata and kapha. They create sweating and increase the digestive fire. Cooli ng herbs 
reduce Pitta but increase vata and kapha. For pitta they are refreshing and help cleanse the blood as well as calm the 
mind.  
Vipaka  is the post -digestive effect the herb or spice will have on the body. Sweet and salty tastes have a sweet or 
moiste ning post -digestive effect; sour has a sour or heating post -digestive effect and pungent, astringent and bitter have 
a pungent or drying post -digestive effect. Sweet tastes are digested during the first (kapha) stage of digestion; in the 
mouth and stomach.  Sour or acidic tastes are digested during the second (pitta) phase of digestion; in the stomach and 
small intestine. Pungent tastes are digested during the third (vata) phase of digestion; in the colon.  
Thus, we can determine the long -term effect a herb w ill have on the body. Sweet vipaka will increase kapha and reduce 
vata and pitta; pungent will increase vata and pitta and reduce kapha; sour will increase pitta and kapha and reduce vata.  
Prabhava  is a term used to describe herbs and spices that have a ‘s pecial’ potency or effect that is unique to it and does 
not always correspond to the rasa, virya or vipaka. Thus, a plant may be classified as ‘heating’ according to virya but is 
generally known to be very effective during high fever.  
In the west herbalist s have classified h er b s  according to their action on the body : 
Alterative:  These purify the blood and balance pitta and are mostly cooling and bitter. Typical cooling alterative herbs 
include: aloe vera, burdock, dandelion, echinacea, manjishta, neem, red clover, sandalwood and yellow dock. Hot, 
pungent alteratives may also be used if there is an ama condition present. Typical herbs include: black pepper, cayenne, 
cinnamon, garlic and myrrh.  
 
 
 88  
 
Anti -parasitical:  These destroy worms, bacteria, fungi, yeast infections and ama and are mainly bitter or pungent. 
Typical herbs include: ajwan, asafoetida, cayenne, black pepper, cloves, garlic, pomegranate, pumpkin seeds, thyme 
and wormwood.  
Aphrodisiacs:  These are strengthening, invigorating and rejuvenating to th e reproductive system and help nourish all 
bodily tissues. They also increase the mental energy and improve nerve function. They include; angelica, asafoetida, 
ashwagandha, asparagus, cloves, fenugreek, garlic, ginseng, gokshura, hibiscus, pippali, rose, s affron, shatavari and 
wild yam.  
Astringent:   These  are drying  and moisture preserving and have a contracting, condensing and compacting effect on 
the tissues. Astringent herbs can be classified as haemostatic (stop bleeding), anti -diarrhoea and vulnerary ( heal 
wounds). Common haemostatic herbs include: hibiscus, manjishta, marshmallow, nettle, plantain, raspberry, saffron, 
self-heal, turmeric and yarrow. Common anti -diarrhoea herbs include: blackberry, comfrey, plantain, raspberry and 
yellow dock. Others, o f a more warming nature and more balancing to vata and the digestive system include: black 
pepper, ginger, haritaki and nutmeg and poppy seeds. Buttermilk and yoghurt may also be used. Vulnerary herbs 
include: aloe vera, chickweed, comfrey, honey, marshmal low, plantain, self -heal, slippery elm and turmeric.  Comfrey, 
marshmallow, plantain, self -heal and yarrow are  haemostatic, anti -diarrhoea and vulnerary.  
Bitter tonic:   These are cold, dry, catabolic herbs that stimulate the digestion, reduce heat and clea r ama and toxins 
from the body; especially the blood and liver – they are usually given in relatively small quantities to people suffering 
from pitta related problems. Many are anti -tumorus, anti -bacterial, anti -viral, and anti -parasitical. They include al oe 
vera, goldenseal, gentian, kutki and neem.  
Carminative:   These herbs reduce bloating and gas, promote peristalsis and settle the digestion. They work mainly on 
vata in the digestive tract and help to increase the digestive fire or agni. Typical herbs in clude: ajwan, asafoetida, basil, 
bay leaves, calamus, cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, garlic, ginger, nutmeg, oregano, thyme and turmeric. Carminative 
herbs with a cooling nature are less likely to produce aggravate pitta and include: chamomile, coriander, cum in, dill, 
fennel, lime, musta, peppermint and wintergreen.  
Diaphoretic:   These are mostly heating herbs that increase circulation and perspiration. They are good for the initial 
stages of colds, fevers and flu as they eliminate toxins from the periphery of  the body. They help cleanse the subtle 
channels and capillaries of the body including the lymphatic system, lungs, respiratory system, sinuses and plasma. 
Cooling diaphoretics also help cleanse the liver and blood. Heating diaphoretics include: angelica, basil, camphor, 
cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, eucalyptus, ginger, sage and thyme. Cooling diaphoretics include: burdock, chamomile, 
coriander, horsetail, peppermint and yarrow.  
Diuretic:   These promote urination and reduce water and toxicity in the body thro ugh increasing the action of the 
kidneys and urinary bladder. They are kapha or pitta reducing herbs and are bitter, astringent or pungent in taste. In 
regard to pitta they dispel damp heat, cool and purify the blood, reduce acidity, control diarrhoea and dysentery and 
help in conditions related to the liver and gall bladder. Cooling diuretic include: asparagus, barley, burdock, coriander, 
dandelion, fennel, gokshura, horsetail, marshmallow, plantain, punarnava and parsley. Heating diuretics include: ajwan,  
cinnamon, garlic, mustard and parsley.  
Emmenagogues:   These are pitta balancing herbs that promote the flow of blood and are indicated for problems related 
to the female reproductive system, especially the menstrual cycle. Cooling emmenagogues include: ch amomile, 
hibiscus, manjishta, musta, raspberry, rose and yarrow. Heating emmenagogues are indicated when causes are more of a 
vata nature and include: angelica, asafoetida, cinnamon, ginger, myrrh, parsley and turmeric.  
Expectorants:   These promote the flo w of phlegm and mucus from the lungs, nasal passages and stomach and are 
therefore indicated for colds, flu, cough, asthma, bronchitis and digestive complaints relating to mucus. They mainly 
help reduce kapha through their drying, warming nature and includ e herbs such as: calamus, cardamom, cinnamon, 
cloves, eucalyptus, ginger, pippali and thyme.  
Demulcent:   These herbs are mucilaginous and alleviate dryness. They are softening, strengthening, nutritive and anti -
inflammatory and help feed the mucus membrane s and connective tissue to heal wounds, sores and ulcers. They can 
also act as moistening expectorants in cases of dry cough. Herbs include: bamboo, chickweed, comfrey root, flaxseed, 
licorice, marshmallow and slippery elm.  
 89  
 
Laxative:  These are used in ca ses of constipation and toxins in the colon as they promote bowel movement and 
peristalsis. Purgatives have a stronger action and are generally cold and bitter; they may cause diarrhoea and gripping 
and include: aloe vera powder, castor oil, rhubarb and se nna. Milder laxatives are used in more general vata conditions 
and include: bran, flaxseed, ghee, licorice, prunes, psyllium seeds, raisins, shatavari, warm milk and yellow dock.  
Nervines:  These act upon the nervous system. They either stimulate or sedate the mind and have an anti -spasmodic 
effect on muscle tissue. They can help with menstrual cramps, headaches, muscle tremors, nerve pain, lumbago and 
sciatica. Heating nervines pacify vata and kapha dosha and include: asafoetida, basil, calamus, camphor, eu calyptus, 
garlic, guggul, myrrh, nutmeg, poppy seeds, sage and valerian. Cooling nervines help pacify pitta dosha and include: 
bhringaraj, chamomile, gotu kola, hops, jatamamsi, mullein, peppermint, sandalwood, St.John’s Wort and wild yam.  
Stimulants:   These are herbs that promote digestion by stimulating agni, the digestive fire. They are mainly heating and 
pungent and are the best herbs to increase appetite and digest ama or toxins. They increase energy, stimulate the senses 
and generally increase pitta a nd decrease kapha. In excess they can disturb vata. Stimulating herbs include: ajwan, 
asafoetida, black pepper, cayenne, cinnamon, cloves, garlic, ginger, horseradish, mustard and pippali.  
Nutritive tonics:   They nourish the body and increase body mass and  are usually sweet, heavy, oily, mucilaginous and 
kapha increasing. They can increase ama and reduce the digestive fire and are often combined with more stimulating 
herbs to counteract this in certain conditions. Nutritive tonics include: almonds, amalaki,  angelica, bala, coconut, 
comfrey root, dates, flaxseeds, ginseng, honey, Irish moss, licorice, jaggary, marshmallow, milk, raisins, sesame seeds, 
shatavari, slippery elm and wild yam.  
Rejuvenative tonics:  These are some of the most important herbs or Rasa yanas in Ayurveda and are said to increase 
the subtle qualities of the mind and body, bringing longevity, renewal and revitalisation. They increase the subtle 
essence of life in the body, ojas and bring clarity to the mind and strength to the body. Rasayan as for vata include: 
ashwagandha, bala, bhringaraj, calamus, chywanaprash, guggul, haritaki and triphala. Rasayanas for pitta include: aloe 
vera, amalaki, brahmi, gotu kola, guduchi, saffron and shatavari. Rasayanas for kapha include: bibhitaki, guggul, pi ppali 
and triphala.  
When an Ayurvedic practitioner has a client with a particular complaint he will aim to determine the underlying cause 
of the problem and not focus primarily of the disease itself. He will establish which dosha has gone out of balance an d 
then suggest lifestyle and dietary changes to help bring the offending dosha back into balance. He may also suggest 
ingesting herbal formulas to speed the process along and his choices will be based on the energetic qualities of the herbs 
used. Thus, if the underlying dosha that is causing the problem is vata, which has the qualities of bitter, light, cold and 
dry, he may prescribe herbs that have opposite qualities to this; sweet, heavy, warming and moistening. He will also 
take into account whether heat ing or cooling herbs (vipaka) are more appropriate and also whether there are any herbs 
with special properties (prabhava) which may be indicated.  
It is usual for an Ayurvedic herbal formula to have many different herbs in it, each creating a particular ef fect and 
complementing or balancing one another. If a herb is specifically known to treat the particular condition (prabhava) this 
will form a relatively large part of the herbal formula. Other herbs will be added to treat the imbalanced dosha, whilst 
others may be added to treat the tissues (dhatus) and channels (shrotas) involved. The state of the digestive fire (agni) 
and the amount of toxicity (ama) in the body will also be given due consideration and the necessary herbs added. Thus, 
some traditional he rbal formulas have as many as fifty herbs in them. The vehicle that is used as a carrier for the herbs 
is also very important so hot water or milk may be use to target vata, aloe vera to target pitta and honey to target kapha. 
The time of day the herbs are  taken affects the manner in which the body will respond as a herbal formula may act on 
one particular tissue or dosha at 6am and another at 6pm. Also, herbs taken before a meal may have a very different 
action on the physiology if taken during or after a meal.  
 90 Ayurvedic herbs  
(a small selection of commonly used  herbs and some of their benefits)  
 
 
It should be noted that no herb or oil should be taken or applied without first consulting with a qualified herbal 
practitioner, especially in pregnancy or if ta king any kind of medication.  
Aloe Vera (aloe barbadensis ): Contains high concentrations of vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes and natural 
sugars. It is good for the digestion, liver, blood, reproductive system and as a laxative. As a gel it is excell ent mixed 
with ghee for burns and piles. Also helps with constipation, obesity, inflammatory skin conditions and conjunctivitis.  
Andrographis (King of the bitters; Andrographis paniculata ): It stimulates the immune system and is good for 
influenza, sore th roat, gastrointestinal parasites and infections, urinary infections, respiratory infections, inflamed skin 
conditions, sores and eczema. It is also good for increasing bile flow and clearing liver infections and inflammation. 
Balances:  Pitta and Kapha.  
Asafoetida  (Hing; Ferula asafoetida ):  Good for digestion and cleansing of digestive tract; it dispels gas and improves 
the intestinal flora. It is also useful for cramps, flatulence, constipation, arthritis, rheumatism, colic pain and asthma. 
Balances:  Vat a and Kapha.  
Amalaki  (Indian Gooseberry; Emblica officinalis ): Good for constipation, ulcers, gastritis, colitis, hepatitis and 
haemorrhoids. It is a great antioxidant and helps lower cholesterol and heal damaged arteries. It is also good for 
diabetes, ana emia, hair loss/greying and general weakness. Balances:  Pitta and Vata . 
Ashwagandha (Winter Cherry, Indian Ginseng; Withania somnifera ): The Ginseng of India with powerful rejuvenating 
and revitalising properties. It is calming and promotes sound sleep wh ile being good for overwork, stress, insomnia, 
anxiety, ADHD, multiple sclerosis, emaciation, skin problems, rheumatism/arthritis, anaemia, infertility, fatigue, 
breathing difficulties, hay fever, allergic rhinitis, convalescence and nervous exhaustion.  I t improves greying hair, 
increases vitamin C and calcium levels, strengthens muscles and acts as a pain killer and anti -inflammatory for painful 
or swollen joints. It also helps relieve impotence, increases sperm count and is a tonic for the uterine muscle s. Can also 
be used for dysmenorrhoea and infertility. Balances: Vata, Pitta and Kapha  
Bibhitaki (Terminalia Belerica ): A powerful Rejuvenative. It helps with liver and heart disease  and also improves the 
voice, vision and promotes the growth of hair. It balances Kapha.  
Bhringaraj  (Eclipta alba ): This rejuvenating herb is excellent for greying and/or balding hair, strengthening bones, 
teeth and hair and improving sight, hearing and memory.  It is the best medicine for cirrhosis and the liver in general as 
well as being a good brain tonic and sleep -inducer.  It is good for the complexion and when applied externally it helps 
reduce inflammation and draw out impurities from the skin. Balances:  Vata, Pitta and Kapha.  
Burdock  (Arctium lappa ): A blood cleanser, digestive stimulant and good for skin problems.  
Chywanaprash  A truly magnificent Rasayana or ‘super food’ which nourishes and strengthens both the mind and 
body.  It has been taken as an ‘elixir of life’ for thousands of years and is now proving to be one o f the strongest 
antioxidants known to man with the ability to arrest and improve many of our modern day diseases such as cancer and 
many auto -immune disorders.  It is meticulously prepared with up to fifty different herbal compounds and has one of 
the high est concentrations of vitamin C of any natural product.  It balances all three doshas and can be taken on a daily 
basis to strengthen the physiology and protect the immune system.  
Devils Claw  (Harpagophytum procumbens ): Good for arthritis, rheumatism, gout  and tendon damage.  
Echinacea  (Echhinasea purpuria ): It cleanses the blood and lymph and destroys ama.  It is good for lung problems, 
colds, flu, wound healing, skin complaints and viral/bacterial infections.  
Gingko  (Gingko biloba ): An anti -oxidant and goo d for circulation, heart problems, memory loss, asthma, bronchitis, 
tinnitus and vertigo.  
Ginseng  (Panex ginseng ): A general tonic for increasing energy levels and promoting weight loss and tissue growth.  
Ginger Root  (Zingiber officinalis ): Helps relieve n ausea, travel sickness, headaches, coughs, colds, menstrual 
cramping, poor digestion and poor circulation. It is toxin -digesting and anti -inflammatory for arthritic conditions, clears 
phlegm in the lungs, increases digestive enzymes, and is effective for g as, griping and E.coli  or Shigella bacillus  
conditions. Balances: Vata and Kapha  
 91  
 
Gotu Kola  (Indian Pennywort or Brahmi; Centella asiatica, Hydrcotyle asiatica, Bacoppa monniera ): A brain tonic and 
best taken with honey to reduce stress, insomnia, ADHD an d anxiety whilst improving memory and mental abilities.  It 
detoxifies the liver and blood, reduces tumours, improves energy levels and strengthens the kidneys. It also helps with 
Alzheimer’s, acne, urticaria, eczema, arthritis, gout, wounds and skin infla mmation. Balances:  Vata and Pitta  
Green Tea  (Camelia sinensis): A very effective antioxidant – 200 times more powerful than vitamin E in neutralising 
free-radicals that attack lipids.  
Guggul  (Indian Bedellium, Commiphora mukul ): Good for skin/tissue regen eration and reducing fat/toxins.  It is often 
used to help arthritis. Balances: Vata, Pitta and Kapha  
Haritaka  (Terminalia chebula): A classic  brain, nerve, digestive and energy tonic.  It also helps regulate the colon and 
is good for both constipation and  diarrhoea.  Haritaka is the basis for Triphala. Balances: Vata, Pitta and Kapha  
Liquorice Root  (Glycyrrhiza glabra ): Relieves coughs, sore throats, respiratory problems; abdominal pain and 
hyperacidity.  
Neem  (Azadiracta indica): A powerful anti -bacterial herb and blood purifier and good for many skin complaints 
(especially inflammation, eczema, psoriasis, urticaria and acne).  In the gastrointestinal tract it helps with hyperacidity, 
ulcers, colitis, crohn’s disease, candida, fistulas and haemorrhoids. It can also help reduce inflammation in joints and 
muscles and regulate blood sugar levels in diabetes. It reduces fever and can also be used as a mouthwash for toothache 
and gingivitis. Balances: Pitta and Kapha  
Passiflora  (Passiflora incarnata ): Promotes re laxation and helps with insomnia, agitation, anxiety, nervousness and 
stress.  
Psyllium Husks   Roughage for improving digestion, relieving constipation and cleansing the colon.  
Sarsaparilla  (Smilax ornate ): Good for skin problems, digestion/ appetite, flatu lence, gout, arthritis, rheumatism and 
nervous disorders.  
Shatavari  (Asparagus racemous ): A particularly rejuvenating herb for the female reproductive system as it cleanses the 
blood and increases fertility.  It is good to take during the menopause, as a m enstrual regulator and for impotence, 
dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, diarrhoea, stomach ulcers, hyperacidity, cancer and chronic fever.  It is also good and for 
soothing inflammation of the mucus membranes and is useful in colitis, crohn’s disease, hyperacidi ty, ulcers and 
gastritis. Balances:  Vata and Pitta  
Slippery Elm  (Ulmus fulva ): Reduces inflammation and is good for lung problems and ulcers.  
Spiralina :  A very high protein sea -plant that is excellent for weight loss, detoxification and reducing appetite .  
St John’s Wort  (Hypericun perforatum ): Calms the nervous system and is beneficial for the treatment of mild 
depression and insomnia.  
Turmeric  (Curcuma longa ): Used as an anti -inflammatory and circulatory stimulant. It improves skin conditions such 
as ac ne, rashes, dermatitis, eczema, urticaria and psoriasis; relieves pain and has anti -oxidant, anti -carcinogenic, anti -
tumour, anti -bacterial, anti -biotic, anti -microbial, anti -viral, carminative and immuno -stimulant properties. It is good for 
asthma, allerg ies, burns, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, obesity, digestive disorders, gallstones, liver 
disorders, tumours, reducing cholesterol, thinning the blood, cancer and ulcers. It also helps with uterine cysts and 
fibroids, endometriosis, dysmeno rrhoea, amenorrhoea and leucorrhea. Balances: Vata, Pitta and Kapha  
Trikatu A powerful tonic for improving digestion and relieving constipation. It is prepared by mixing ground ginger, 
black pepper and cayenne pepper (one pinch of each) in a little honey ( one teaspoon). It balances Kapha.  
Valerian  (Valeriana officinalis ): Good for nervous disorders such as tension and anxiety. It is also good for insomnia, 
fainting and menstrual cramps.  
Wild Yam  (Dioscorea villosa ): Helps with hormonal imbalances, period pa ins, menopause, colic, joint inflammation, 
flatulence and liver cleansing.  
 92 Triphala  
 
Triphala formula contains Amalaki, Haritaki and Bibhitaki is con sidered a 'tri -doshic rasayana' – it i s  o n e  o f  t h e  m o s t  
popular Ayurvedic herbal remedies as it helps rect i f y  c o n s tipation and bowel irregularity but is also something of a 
universal panacea for a wide range of complaints.  
It helps cleanse the blood and detoxify the liver as it possesses bitter anthroquinones which help stimulate bile flow and 
peristalsis. It is a powerful tonic as it is high in vitamin C, linoleic oil, phospholipids and oth er important nutrients . It is 
rich in antioxidant s that fight free radicals  and has anti -viral (HIV, AIDS, herpes etc) and anti -bacterial properties . It 
tonifies and protect s the heart whilst also lowering blood pressure  and reducing fat and cholesterol. It helps with the 
digestion  and assimilation of food, improves blood circulation  and has anti-inflammatory  properties . It revitalises the 
wh ol e body by removing  toxins, gas a nd distension whilst nourishing  the ne rvo us system. It is good for anemia, fatigue, 
candida, cancer, allergies, constipation, diarrhoea, yeast infections, indigestion and skin disorders. It can be used for all 
eye diseases including conjunctivitis, progres sive myopia, glaucoma and cataracts . 
Traditionally triphala is taken as a churna or powder as the taste on the tongue is important to its action. Two or three 
grams of the powder can be taken daily with warm water for health maintenance (alternatively, 1g can be taken three 
times a day between meals). Larger doses are more laxative whilst smaller doses are more gradually blood purifying. 
The dose taken should be increased or decreased according to the response of the bowels.  
 
Aloe Vera  
 
Known to herbalists and medical folklorists for centuries as the "medical plant" or "the potted physician", this cactus -
like plant who se name means "shining bitter substance," was widely regarded as a master healing plant. In recent 
decades medical research has confirmed that  Aloe Vera is a truly amazing plant with an incredible array of medicinal 
healing properties.  
Applied to wounds, aloe gel is a mild anaesthetic, reliev ing itching, swelling, and pain.  It is also antibacterial and anti 
fungal, increa ses blood flow to wounde d areas  and stimulates fibroblasts, the skin cells responsible for wound healing.  
It also helps relieve burns and psoriasis. It is effective for treating inflammatory bowel disease, detoxifying the bowel, 
neutrali sing stomach acidity, relieving constipatio n and healing gastric ulcers.  It has also been shown to reduce blood 
sugar in diabeti cs. 
Aloe can help prevent arthritis and reduce the inflammation in joints already affected by arthritis . It can  also inhibit the 
autoimmune reaction associated with certai n forms of arthritis, in which the body attacks its own tissues.  
Aloe could also provide nutritional support for HIV patients as it has properties which reduce occurrences of 
opportunistic infections, thrush, fatigue  and diarrhoea.  Research indicates  that aloe helps stimulates the body's immune 
system, particularly  the T4 helper cells - white blood cells that activate the immune response to infection.  An extract of 
mannose, one of the sugars in aloe, has been shown to inhibit HIV -1 (the virus associated wit h AIDS).  
Aloe has been found to significantly suppress  the growth of cancer cells. It has been shown to help turn  on the immune 
system by activating macrophages (white blood cells which "swallow" antigens), causing the release of immune -
activating (and ant icancer) substances such as interferons, interleukins , and tumour  necros is factor. In addition, aloe  
seems to also promote  the growth o f  n o r m a l  ( n o n -cancerous) cells . 
 93 Herbal formulas  for common ailments  
 
 
 
It should be noted that no herb or oil should be taken or applied without first consulting with a qualified herbal 
practitioner, especially in pregnancy or if taking any kind of medication. This glossary lists a range of common ailments 
and the combination of Pukka Herbs remedies ( www.pukkaherbs.com ) that can help best to restore the body to health.  
 
 
Condition   Treatment Strategy    Action  
 
Acne   Neem & Sarsaparilla formula   Cleanses blood  
  Triphala plus     Detoxifies the bowel  
  Neem tincture  
Aloe Vera juice  
Aloe gel (external)  
  Neem & Sandalwood cream (external)  
 
Arthritis   Turmeric & Boswellia formula   Anti-inflammatory  
 Triphala plus     Clears toxins  
Turmeric tincture  
Mahanarayan oil (external)  
 
Asthma - child   Chywanaprash     Tonifies lungs  
Turmeric tinctu re    Stops inflammation and phlegm  
Revitalizing tea  
 
Asthma - adult  Licorice & Ginger formula    Reduces wheezing 
Chywanaprash     Tones lungs  
Asafoetida formula    Antispasmodic  
Triphala plus     Gently regulates the 
bowel Revitalising tea  
Mahanarayan oil  
 
Back pain   Turmeric tincture     Stops pain  
Ashwagandha tincture    Strengthens spine  
Ashwagandha plus  
 Mahanarayan oil (External)  
 
Candida   Neem capsule or tincture    Kills candida  
Asafoetida plus     Reduces gas and bloating  
Shatavari plus     Clears dischar ges 
 Triphala plus     Regulates bowel  
Detox tea     Stops bloating  
 
Catarrh   Trikatu      Reduces mucus  
Licorice & Ginger formula  
Nasya nasal oil     Clears sinuses  
Revitalising tea  
 
Cellulite   Guggul plus     Reduces fat  
Gotu Kola tincture    Specific for cell ulite 
Mahanarayan oil  
 Shatavari Plus     Benefits female health  
 
Cholesterol    Guggul plus     Reduces cholesterol  
Turmeric tincture     Reduces cholesterol  
Aloe vera juice  
  Hemp seed oil     Reduces LDL and congestion  
Revitalising tea  
 
Chronic Fatigue   A shwagandha plus    Tonifies – m en 
Shatavari plus     Tonifies – w o m en  
Triphala plus     When there is constipation  
Asafoetida plus     Bloating  
 Amla & Peppermint formula   D i a r r h o ea  
Chywanaprash     Boosts immunity  
 
Cold Sores   Andrographis & Holy Basil formula   Anti viral  
Neem cream  
 
 94  
 
 
 
 
Colds   Trikatu      Reduces mucus  
Licorice & Ginger formula    Recovery from colds and coughs)  
Andrographis & Holy Basil formula   Reduces infection  
Nasya nasal oil     Clears the nose  
 Revitalising tea  
 
C o n s t i p a t i o n   Triphala plus     Evacuates bowel  
Triphala      Regulates bowel  
Asafoetida plus     Bloating and gas  
Chywanaprash  
Hemp seed oil     Lubricates dryness  
Aloe vera juice  
 
Cough   Licorice & Ginger formula    Nourishes lungs and stops coughing  
 Trikatu      Clears phlegm  
Soothing  t ea    Clears phlegm and soothes throat  
Chywanaprash  
 Bhringaraj oil  
 
Cystitis   Gokshura & Shatavari formula   Regulates urinary system  
Neem capsules     C l ea r s  i n f e ct i on  
 Detox tea     Eases urination  
 
Dermatitis   Neem & Sarsaparilla formula   Cleans skin  
Neem tincture     Reduces inflammation  
Guduchi plus     C l ea r s  t h e l i v er  
 Triphala plus     Clears constipation  
Aloe vera juice     Anti-inflammatory  
Neem cream  
Aloe vera gel  
Hemp seed oil  
Bhringaraj oil, Neem oil (external)  
 
D i a r r h o ea   Amla & Peppermint formul a 
Asafoetida plus     Stops cramps  
Detox tea     Stops cramps  
 
Digestive Problems  Trikatu      Stimulates digestive enzymes  
Asafoetida plus     Erratic appetite with gas  
Amla & Peppermint formula   Acidity  
Aloe vera juice  
Detox tea     Stops bloating  
 
E cz em a   Neem & Sarsaparilla formula   Stops inflammation  
Guduchi plus     Reduces toxins in liver  
 Triphala plus     Clears bowel  
Neem cream     Stops infections  
Aloe vera juice     Clears toxins, anti -inflammatory  
 Aloe gel      Reduces inflammation 
Peppermint water spra y   Stops itching  
Hemp seed oil     Anti-inflammatory  
Brahmi oil, Bhringaraj oil  
 
Fatigue   Ashwagandha plus    Male energy  
Shatavari plus     Female energy  
Triphala plus     Cl ea rs stagnation 
Chywanaprash  
 
Fertility   Shatavari plus     Boosts fertility in women  
A sh w agandha plus    Boosts fertility in men  
  Triphala plus     Cl ea rs congestion  
  R o s e  w a t er     Nourishes uterus 
Chywanaprash  
  Ashwagandha oil  
 
Flatulence   Asafoetida plus     Stops flatulence  
Triphala plus     Regulates the bowel  
Ashwagandha and Gotu kola  f o r m u l a  Reduces stress on the bowel  
 
 
 95  
 
 
 
Glandular Fever   Ashwagandha Plus    For strengthening  
  Andrographis & Holy Basil formula   For clearing the virus  
Chywanaprash  
 
Ha ir  Loss   Amla & Peppermint formula   Nourishes hair  
Bhringraj oil  
Coconut oil  
 
Halit osis  Triphala plus     To clear congestion  
Asafoetida plus     To regulate appetite  
Amla & Peppermint formula   To regulate appetite  
Aloe vera juice     Regulates bowel  
 Peppermint water spray  
 
Hay fever   Peppermint & Pippali formula   Reduces inflammation and  irritation  
Trikatu      Anti-histamine, reduces secretions  
Aloe vera juice     Protects liver  
Rose water eye drops    Stops itching and soothes inflammation  
N a s y a  o i l  
 
Heartburn   Amla & Peppermint formula   Stops acid  
Aloe vera juice     Cools stomach  
Rosewa t e r     Antacid  
  Ashwagandha & Gotu Kola formula   Reduces stress  
Refreshing tea     reduces burning  
 
Heart Conditions   Arjuna & Hawthorn formula   Strengthens heart  
Turmeric tincture     Increases circulation  
  Amla tincture     Strengthens heart  
Hemp seed oil     Reduces LDL and congestion  
Love tea      Soothes heart  
 
Hypertension   Punarnava plus     Clear fluids and regulates BP  
A l o e v er a      Stops inflammation  
  Triphala plus     Reduces congestion  
Ashwagandha & Valerian formula   Reduces stress  
Soothing tea  
 
I B S  Triphala plus     With constipation  
Asafoetida plus     With gas and cramps  
Amla & Peppermint formula   With diarrhoea and irritation  
Ashwagandha & Valerian formula   For  str ess  
 A l o e v er a  ju i ce     Cleans bowel and stops irritation  
Refreshing tea  
 
Men's Heal th  Ashwagandha plus    Tones reproductive system  
Guduchi plus     D e t o x  f o r  l i v e r  
 A l o e v er a  ju i ce     Clears liver and heart  
Chywanaprash  
 
Menopause   Shatavari plus     Stops sweats, mood swings  
Shatavari     Balances hormones  
 A l o e v er a  ju i ce     Stops flush es 
R os e wa t er  s p r a y     For hot flushes  
Refreshing tea     Reduces heat  
Chywanaprash  
 
Migraine   Guduchi plus     Helps to clean liver  
Amla & Peppermint formula   Prevents irritating acid  
Ashwagandha & Valerian formula   Calms str ess  
Refreshing tea  
 A l o e v er a  j uice, Brahmi oil  
Mouth Ulcers   Neem tincture     Reduces inflammation  
Andrographis & Holy Basil formula   Boosts immunity  
Amla & Peppermint formula   Reduces inflammation  
Aloe juice     H ea l s  u l cer s  
 Refreshing tea  
 
 
 
 
 96  
 
 
 
Osteoporosis   Ashwagandha plus    Tonifies skeletal system  
Shatavari plus     Regulates oestrogen/progesterone balance  
Turmeric & Boswellia formula   Increase blood flow to bones  
Chywanaprash  
 
Painful Periods    Shatavari plus     Stops spasms  
Turmeric tincture     Reduces inflammatory prostaglandi ns 
A l o e v er a  ju i ce     Clears congestion  
  Triphala plus     If associated with constipation  
Soothing tea     For painful periods  
 
Piles  Triphala plus     Gives soft stool  
Gotu Kola & Turmeric formula   Reduces venous congestion  
Guduchi plus     Regulates porta l vein  
 A l o e v er a  ju i ce  
 
Pregnancy   Shatavari     Increases lactation  
 R os e wa t er  s p r a y     Uplifts mood  
 
Prostatiti s  Gokshura & Shatavari formula   Eases urination, reduces blockages  
 D et ox  t ea  
 
Psoriasis   Neem & Sarsaparilla formula   Clear lesions  
Triphal a plus     Clears bowel  
Aloe Vera juice     Protect liver  
Neem cream  
Aloe gel  
Hemp seed oil     Reduces inflammation  
Brahmi oil, Neem oil (external)  
 
Sinus   Trikatu      Opens sinuses  
Licorice & Ginger formula   Prevents blockage  
Nasya nasal oil     Stops conges ti on 
Revitalising tea  
 
Sleep   Ashwagandha & Valerian formula  Sedative  
 
Stress   Ashwagandha & Gotu Kola formula  D a y  s t r e s s  
Ashwagandha & Valerian formula   Night stress  
Brahmi plus     For concentration  
 Brahmi oil  
 
T h y r o i d   Guggul plus     Regulates thyroid  
 
Travel Sickness   Asafoetida plus     Settles digestion  
Ashwagandha & Gotu Kola formula  Relaxant  
Trikatu      Regulates appetite  
 
Varicose Veins   Gotu Kola & Turmeric formula   Increases venous return  
Turmeric     Increases circulation  
 
Weight Loss   Guggul plus     Reduces cholesterol and weight  
Punarnava plus     Clears fluids  
 
Women's Health   Shatavari plus     Nourishes re productive system  
Shatavari     Balances hormones  
Aloe Vera juice  
Aloe gel  
 Rose water spray  
 
 
 
* Reproduced with the kind permission of Sebast ian Pole of Pukka Herbs (see resources).  
 
 97 A guide to using aromatic essential oils  
 
 
Essential oils are an aromatic constituent of many plants, flowers and shrubs and have powerful healing properties if 
distilled and applied correctly. Only organic, grade  A (clinic/therapeutic grade) oils with ISO/AFNOR certification 
should be used if you wish to ensure that the oils you purchase will be safe and have the desired therapeutic effect. If 
essential oils meet the above criteria then many may be safely used to flavour beverages or food, added to base oils for 
massage, mixed with bathwater, evaporated in aroma burners, applied topically to the body and inhaled from diffusers.  
 
To prepare a herbal tea, add one or two drops of essential oil to a one -litre thermos flask. Be sure to only use oils that 
are recommended for oral consumption. When using essential oils on the skin it is best to mix them with a base oil such 
as sesame or almond in order to prevent possible skin irritations or sensitivity and also to increa se their therapeutic 
value (a mix of 20:1 base oil to essential oil is ideal).  If used neat on the skin it is important to test on the back of th e 
hand first to check for skin sensitivity.  Do not use undiluted anywhere on the skin if a reaction occurs.  
 
Serious complaints and imbalances in the body have often taken many months or even years to manifest as physical 
symptoms.  Essential oils can help heal the underlying problem and can thereby reduce or eliminate the outward 
symptoms.  However, this healing  and balancing process may take weeks or even months depending on the severity of 
the problem being tackled so patience and perseverance are vital. Prescribed drugs may well clear up outward 
symptoms of a disease very quickly but they are generally toxic t o the body and can further weaken an already 
compromised immune system.  Furthermore, they don’t often address the underlying problem but simply suppress the 
condition and drive it even deeper into the tissues. As with any medical condition, the disease, i llness or complaint is 
both a warning sign that you are treating the body incorrectly and also the body’s way of releasing toxins or impurities.  
If you suppress that process with drugs you have a short -term gain but a dangerous long -tern loss because the real 
problem hasn’t been addressed and dealt with.  
 
The causes of specific ailments or conditions are manifold but are often a combination of wrong diet, wrong lifestyle, 
stress and lack of exercise. Eating well -balanced, freshly cooked, nutritious meals, reducing stress levels and exercising 
regularly go a long way to preventing the onset of disease processes. However, the judicious use of essential oils will 
undoubtedly help with any complaints or conditions you may be suffering from. However, h er b  and oils are powerful 
remedies and should o n l y  be taken or applied after first consulting with a qualified herbal practitioner, especially in 
pregnancy or if taking any kind of medication.  
 
Commonly used essential oils:  
Basil : Use for migraines, mental fatigue, scanty periods, relaxing muscles, insect bites and chest infections.  Apply 
diluted to the temples, crown, forehead, heart and navel.  May be added to food and water. Balances Vata and Kapha.  
Cederwood  
Good for combating hair loss, insomnia, skin problems,  nervous tension and anxiety, dandruff, cystitis and fluid 
retention.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  Balances Vata.  
Cinnamon  
Use for improving circulation, coughs, exhaustion, digestion, rheumatism and warts.   
Apply diluted to the feet, ankles and wris ts.  May be added to food and water.  Balances Pitta.  
Clove : Good for fighting infectious diseases, intestinal parasites, respiratory infections, pain, toothache, scabies, 
infected wounds, warts, mouth/skin sores, skin cancer/disease, dermatitis, rheumatis m, arthritis, cystitis, diarrhoea, 
acne, halitosis, headaches, nausea, insect bites and neuritis.  Use diluted with sesame oil as a mouth gargle and apply 
diluted to problem areas.  Balances Vata & Kapha.  
Eucalyptus globules: An excellent oil for: healing wounds; using as an insect repellent; for asthma, coughs, diabetes, 
herpes, hypoglycaemia, lung problems, headaches, aches/pains, arthritis, burns, ulcers and general sores.  Apply diluted 
on location and use for steam inhalation.  May be added to food and  water.  Balances Kapha.  
 
 98  
 
Fennel : Very good for improving the digestion.  Also use for cystitis, nausea, menstrual pains, spasms, gout, 
constipation, hormone balancing, internal cleansing and respiratory complaints.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  May 
be added to food and water.  Balances Vata, Pitta & Kapha.  
Frankincense : Use for asthma, depression, ulcers, stress, allergies, insect bites, bronchitis, cancer, respiratory infections, 
headaches, herpes, high blood pressure, inflammation, stress, warts. A pply diluted to problem areas.  Balances Vata.  
Ginger : Good for motion sickness, arthritis/rheumatism, digestion, alcoholism, appetite, respiratory problems, coughs, 
nausea, sprains, sinusitis and sore throats.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  May be adde d to food and water.  Balances 
Vata & Kapha.  
Lavender : Strong antiseptic and good for burns, wounds, skin care, nervous disorders, sunburn, allergies, headaches, 
indigestion, insomnia, high blood pressure, nausea, menstrual pains, scarring, arthritis/rheum atism, asthma, insect bites, 
infections, hives and depression.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  May be added to food/water.  Balances Vata & Pitta.  
Lemon : Use for skin care, warts, varicose veins, throat infections, asthma, bleeding, herpes, anaemia, lowe ring blood 
pressure, improving digestion, healthy nails, improving memory, boosting immune functioning and respiratory 
problems.  Apply to problem areas diluted with sesame oil or as a floral spray mixed with peppermint.  May be added to 
food and water.  B alances Pitta.  
Nutmeg : Good for fighting fatigue and increasing energy levels, improving appetite/digestion, gallstones, halitosis, 
rheumatism, nausea, pain, frigidity, impotence, menstrual pains and bacterial infections.  Apply diluted to problem 
areas.  May be added to food and water.  Balances Vata & Kapha.  
Peppermint : Good for the liver strengthening cleansing, improving digestion, nausea, respiratory problems, improving 
concentration, itchy skin, asthma, candida, diarrhoea, heartburn, halitosis, haemor rhoids, menstrual pains, headaches, 
motion sickness, tumours, shock, throat infections, varicose veins, skin problems, arthritis/rheumatism and toothache.  
Apply diluted to the stomach, feet, temples and tongue (for increased concentration, alertness and m e m o r y ) .   M a y  b e  
added to food and water.  Balances Pitta.  
Pine: Good for respiratory problems, as an antiseptic, muscles/joint problems, infections, fatigue, asthma, lungs, 
diabetes, sinusitis, rheumatoid arthritis, coughs, cuts, lice, sores, stress and in creasing blood pressure.  Dilute to avoid 
skin irritation and avoid low cost adulterated oils.  Do not use if epileptic, under doctor supervision or have high blood 
pressure.  Apply diluted to problem areas or use for steam inhalation.  Balances Kapha.  
Rosemary : Use for improving concentration, arthritis/rheumatism, liver cleansing, menstrual pains, asthma, digestive 
problems, breathing difficulties and nervous tension.  May be used for steam inhalations or applied diluted to problem 
areas.  May be added to  food and water.  Balances Kapha.  
Sandalwood : Good for nervous disorders, circulation problems, insomnia, enhancing meditation, infections, depression 
and skin problems.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  Balances Pitta.  
Spruce : Use for athlete’s foot, fung al infections, respiratory problems, arthritis/rheumatism, painful joints, nervous 
disorders, hormonal imbalances and respirator y problems.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  Balances Vata, Pitta and 
Kapha.  
Tea-Tree: Use for athlete’s foot, fungal infectio ns, respiratory infections, bronchitis, gum disease, rash, sore throat, 
sunburn, tonsillitis, vaginal thrush, acne, burns, candida, cold sores, warts, wounds.  Apply diluted to problem areas.  
Balances Pitta.    
Please note:  
‘The Essential Oils Desk Referen ce’ published by Essential Science Publishing  
(www.espublishing.com ) is an excellent guide to using essential oils.  
 
 99 Chapter 5 
Practical therapies & advice  
~ keeping the body healthy & balanced ~ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The secret of making s omething work in your lives is,  
first of all, the deep desire to make it work.  
Then the faith and belief that it can work.  
Then hold that clear definite vision in your consciousness , 
and see it working out step by step  
 wi thout one thought of doubt or disbelief.  
~ Eileen Caddy  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 100 Nasya home treatment  
 
 
 
Nasya is the nasal administration of medicinal herbs, decoctions and o ils to alleviate  complaints that occur above the 
clavicl e. This therapy is most commonly indica ted for dry nasal passages, hoarseness of voice, stiffness in the head, 
neck and jaw area, headaches and certain eye and ear problems. It relieves mental and emotional stress, anxiety, fear 
and negativity.  
 
The nose is the doorway to the brain, mind and co nsciousness. Prana, the vital life force, enters our bodies through the 
breath. Lubrication of the nasal passages with medicated oil provides subtle moisture to the air we breathe and affects 
the higher cerebral faculties and sensory organs. It promotes cl arity of perception, intuition and stimulates memory. It 
also enhances cerebral circulation  and restores  prana or life energy to the senses . 
 
This self -treatment can be undertaken weekly (from one to three days duration ) if you frequently suffer from mild 
headaches, congestion or blocked sinuses.  However, it is contra -indicated during colds/flu, high fever, pregnancy and 
menstruation and should only be used under medical supervision if highly congested.   
 
 
You will need:  MP16 ( nasal oil) * 
MA634  or eucalyp tus oil (inhalation oils)*  
Sesame oil*  
  Box of large tissues  
Salt water  
Hot water bottle  
  Steam bowl  
Boiling water  
Bath towel  
Hand towel x 2  
  1 dropper (for applying oil into nose)  
 
* available form MAP (see resources section)  
 
Instructions:  
 
1. Vigorously  massage the head with wa r m  sesame oil for 5 minutes.  
2. Fill a large bowl with hot water and add 1 -2 drops of eucalyptus or MP634 oil.  
3. Place a towel over the head and bowl to keep the steam in and gently inhale the steam.  
4. Continue for 5-10 minutes  - add m o r e  hot water and/or inhalation oil if required.  
5. Fill a large bowl hot water. Fold a hand towel four times (lengthways) and place in boiling hot water – make sure 
the ends are not placed in water.  Hold the ends of the towel and wring out the hot water.  
6. Open up the towel and shake briefly to cool it down to a comfortable temperature for placing on the skin.  
7. Fold in half, lengthways. L ie down on bed and wrap the hot towel around the head , avoiding the eyes . 
8. Repeat two more times.  
9. Remove the towel and dry the face thoroughly.  
10. Lie on a bed with the head hanging over the end and apply one drop (from dropper) of MP16 or ‘Shakti’ (see recipe 
below) into each nostril.  
11. Pinch both nostrils, start to inhale and immediately remove fingers to allow for a deep inhalation – repeat several 
times to allow substance to penetrate sinus cavities.  
12. Massage the forehead, above  and below the eyebrows, on the sides of the nose and under the cheekbones . 
13. Cough up and spit out any mucus that forms in the throat – blow your nose if necessa ry and do not suppress 
sneezing (have your tissues handy).  
 
 101  
 
14. If there is a burning sensation in the throat gargle with salt water and tilt head further back next time you insert the 
nasya substance.  
15. Repeat steps 10 – 13 but with two drops of oil. You may increase to three, four and eventually five drops if this 
feels com fortable (or until there is some mucus discharge ). 
16. Never continue if the nose becomes completely blocked, a headache develops or you experience other unpleasant 
effects.  
17. Finish by gargling with salt water and then keep head warm and dry for rest of the day.  
 
 
Alternative nasya treatments : 
If you do not have the time do the full Nasya therapy you may simply lie on the bed with your head tilted back and 
follow the instructions for inserting th e nasya drops. This is obviously less effective but still very beneficial.  This may 
be done daily when there is congestion and weekly as a preventative measure.   
 
Another method of administration of nasya oil , when lyin g down is not convenient, is to simpl y  place a drop of nasya 
oil on the little finger and gently insert it into the nostril  and inhale fairly forcefully . Next, g ently massage the inner 
walls of the nasal passage. Alternate left and right nostrils until each nostril has received a total of thr ee applications of 
oil. The lubrication and gentle massage helps to alleviate stress and release any tension in the tissues.  This may be done 
daily as a preventative treatment.  
 
It is not recommended  to use nasya oil immediately following the neti pot wash , especially if these therapies are new to 
you – alternate days may be better. By taking just five minutes a day to incorporate this simple treatment into your daily 
ayurvedic regime, you can enjoy the many healing benefits of the full nasya  therapy. 
 
Recipe for Shakti:  
On a low heat slowly warm 15mls of sesame oil in a small pan with ¼ level tsp ground ginger, ¼ level tsp ground black 
pepper and ¼ level tsp ground clove.  Remove from heat before it starts to smoke (about one minute) – cool for 30secs 
– reapply to heat for 10 secs – cool again for 30 seconds – heat again for 10 seconds and then allow to cool to body 
temperature.  If the oil starts to smoke or burn at any stage throw the mixture away and start again.  Strain the mixture 
through a muslin cloth , allow to cool and then place in a small glass bottle (with dropper top).  The bottle and mixture 
can be warmed slightly (to body temperature) in hot water just before use.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 102 Skin brushing, tongue scraping & sinus cleansing  
 
 
 
The following proce dures are also important as part of a daily detox – skin brushing helps detoxify, tone and improve 
the skin, tongue scraping helps detoxify the body in general and a nasal wash cleans the sinus and helps prevent colds 
and congestion.  
 
Skin Brushing (for Ka pha):  Skin brushes can be purchased from most chemists.  Each morning, either before or after 
bathing/showering, brush the skin for 2 -5 minutes.  Brush upwards towards the heart and use circular motions on the 
joints and long strokes on the arms and legs.   Work up the body starting with the feet and legs.  The hands and arms 
come next followed by the back and sides.  The back can be best scrubbed using a long -handled brush (use circular 
motions on the lower back).  Now massage the abdomen using slow circul ar motions and up and down motions on the 
sternum.  When you first begin skin brushing the bristles may feel very rough – the body soon gets used to this and after 
a few days you’ll really begin to enjoy this pleasant invigorating experience.  The bristles  naturally soften after a few 
massage sessions but you can run the brush under hot water if you really want a softer feel.  
 
Tongue Scraping:   Use a stainless steel or silver scraper and gently remove the white coating from the tongue each 
morning before yo u clean your teeth.  This white coating is ‘ama’ or undigested food and it often the cause of bad 
breath.  Once these toxic substances have been removed the breath improves and feels fresher, the taste buds come to 
life and the digestion benefits from not having to cope with as much bacterial/toxic waste.  
 
Gargling:  Gargling with a small amount of sesame oil and coating the inside of the nostrils with a smear of oil with 
your little finger helps prevent viruses and bacteria from entering the body.  It is a  great preventative measure against 
colds and flu.  
 
Nasal cleansing:  Regular use of a Neti Pot cleanses the sinuses of old congested mucus and dirt and enables the breath to 
flow more freely through both nostrils.  It is therefore an invaluable aid to yoga , pranayama and meditation and also in 
helping prevent allergies, asthma, colds and flu. To use, mix ¼ tsp of non -iodized salt with lukewarm water in your Neti 
Pot.  Bring the spout to your nose, bend forward over the sink or bath with the head tilted to o ne side and slightly 
forward. As water begins to flow through into the upper nostril, make slight adjustments to the head and Neti Pot 
position until water to flows out of the other nostril. If the water enters your throat , instead of out of the other nost ril, 
simply make further alterations to the position of your head and Neti pot until it flows properly. Repeat for the other 
nostril. It helps to start by cleansing the nostril  on the side  that feels freer and less blocked with mucus.  
 
After cleansing the nostrils blow the nose freely through both nostrils to clear the nose of excess water and mucus.  
Don’t close off one nostril when doing this as this may allow water to enter the ear channels. This is unlikely to happen 
but should this or any other problem s occur during this process, kneel down and bring your forehead to the floor.  Raise 
the hips above the level of the head and blow freely through both nostrils as before - it may help to turn the head to 
either side when doing this.  
 
A second technique to try, once proficiency is gained in the above method, is to direct water from the nose and out 
through the mouth. As in the previous method, make slight adjustments with the head and Neti pot until water flows 
into the mouth – then spit it out.  
Benefits of  nasal rinse :      Removes mucus and pollution from nasal passages and sinuses  
Daily use relieves allergies, colds and sinusitis  
Cooling and soothing to the mind   
Helps prevent respiratory tract diseases  
Beneficial in the treatment of headaches and migrain es 
Alleviates anxiety, anger and depression  
Removes drowsiness, making the head and sense organs feel light and smooth  

 103  Meir Schneider and the ‘Bates Method’  
 
 
 
Meir Schneider was born with cataracts and by the time his eyes were operated on, at the age o f four, his brain had lost 
the opportunity to develop the ability to see.  He had already developed nystagmus, which is involuntary movement of 
the eyes, glaucoma, which is high pressure in the eyeball, and cross -eyes.  The surgery, and the four operations  that 
were done later, scarred his lenses to the extent that light could hardly penetrate through them.  By the age of 7 he was 
declared legally blind for life, and for the next ten years did all his reading in Braille.  Today he can even read the small  
print on his unrestricted driver's licence.  Meir broke boundaries and proved that eyes cannot only get worse, as is the 
common belief, but can also improve.  
At the age of 17 Meir was introduced to vision improvement exercises, a method developed by Dr. Wil liam Bates over 
100 years ago.  In his studies of visual function, Bates observed how people behaved visually when they see perfectly 
and based on these observations, he developed a series of exercises to mimic optimal visual behaviour.  He also learned 
how people create refractive errors - nearsightedness (myopia) far -sightedness (hyperopia), middle -age farsightedness 
(presbyopia), and astigmatism.  In every case of refractive error he found "a strain of the mind" that was held in the 
body, the face, and e specially the eyes.  This anxiety, he found, was relived and relayed continuously along the body's 
neural pathways.  To relieve chronic tension in the eyes, as in the rest of the body, Bates hypothesized, one must learn 
to use them properly and to relax th em often; every Bates exercise is a relaxation technique.  
Probably Bates' greatest gift was his ability to view medicine in a different light.  Organs that coul d be seen as 
mechanical objects:  the eye as a camera or the heart as a pump, could also be viewe d holistically, as parts of an 
interdependent system.  The body could be seen as intrinsically passive, and so requiring health care (drugs, surgery, 
corrective lenses) or as living tissue, with a built -in consciousness and a capacity for learning.  Bates favoured the latter 
vi e w.  
It was already known in Bates' time that the tissue of the retina, the back of the eye where light falls on photosensitive 
cells, is brain tissue.  The parts of the brain associated with vision are as much a part of the visual app aratus as the eyes 
are.  In fact the brain is the dominant part of the visual system and Bates reasoned that seeing is psychological 
behaviour, which can be done well or done poorly.  "We see very largely with the mind," he wrote, "and only partly 
with the  eyes”.  Vision depends on the mind's interpretation of the impression on the retina.  What we see is not that 
retinal impression but our own interpretation of it.  But when, as a coping response that has become habitual, the mind 
refuses to let the eye se e properly, a deliberate act of imagination can help.  
Thus, Bates would invite patients to appreciate and visualize the forms and blackness of letters on an eye chart until the 
patients would at last give themselves permission to relax and see the letters.   With the help of a retinoscope, which 
allows the user to determine the degree of visual clarity and nature of the subject's refractive error, Bates checked 
hundreds of thousands of eyes and the results surprised him.  He found that normal 20/20 vision wa sn’t constant and 
none of the eyes he examined had perfect vision around the clock.  Normally sighted eyes drifted off to moments of 
farsightedness, nearsightedness, and astigmatism, and then picked up again to 20/20.  Bad vision got worse, got a little 
better, and even had flashes of perfect vision . Temporary anxieties often produced refractive error.  
Bates had been taught that in daytime, full colour vision is sharpest in a small area in the centre of the retina called the 
macula, especially in the tiny c entre of the macula, the fovea.  The macula is sculpted into a parabolic receiver - like an 
antenna dish, but for light - with the fovea at the pit.  Vision at the fovea is 20/20; 10 degrees off centre, it is 20/4000, 
within the realm of legal blindness.  The correctly functioning eye sees the small detail it is focusing on best - a 
characteristic called central fixation.  To see many details equally well, a correctly functioning eye will flit rapidly from  
one sharply realized detail to another; Bates called  it shifting.  Good daytime vision is passive and effortless, consisting 
of automatic and continual central fixation and shifting.  The poorly functioning eye overstrains and then numbs the 
macula until it has lost central fixation.  
The exercises that he d evised release the tension from over -strained eyes and help regain central fixation ability.  
There are now Meir Schneider centres teaching ‘The Bates Technique’ all around the world.  
 104 Eye exercises  
 
 
 
Sleep in the dark:  Curtains should shut out streetlight s; the eyes get full rest only in darkness.  
Palming :  Rub your hands together, close your eyes and gently cover them with your hands so you block out all light but without 
pressing on the eye.  Breathe easily and picture a black object – imagine this objec t on a black background and then paint the world 
black.  Do this whenever the eyes need relaxing.  
Peripheral vision:  Take a black piece of paper four inches square and stick it between your eyebrows so you can't see in front of 
you.  Sit in a dark room an d rapidly move two flashlights out to either side of you while looking straight ahead. As your peripheral 
vision improves , increase the challenge by moving the flashlights further back. Alternatively you may do this exercise in normal light 
and substitute waggling movements of the fingers for the movement of the flashlights.  This exercise will improve your peripheral 
vision and train both eyes to work together.  
Shifting:   Look at a picture on the wall in a relaxed way and move your attention from one small  detail to another.  Then close your 
eyes and visualize what you have just seen.  Repeat.  The same brain cells work for visualizing as for seeing and this exerci se helps 
retrain them and strengthens the macula.  
Blinking:   Sit easily, breathing gently and blink rapidly one hundred times - then close the eyes and visualize blinking a hundred 
times.  Repeat.  This massages and cleanses the eyes.  In times of stress, just when blinking and relaxed breathing would be most 
useful, we are most likely to suspend t hese essential functions.  
Focusing:   Place the index finger 6 inches in front of the eyes and, for approx 30 seconds, alternate your focus from your finger to an 
object on the horizon.  This should be simple and smooth with no strain or discomfort.  The sp eed of alternating may increase as 
strength of eye muscles improve.  
Far-Reading : Place some reading material on a wall, relax, breathe easily and read from a distance that is comfortable – increase the 
distance gradually each day (read for 30 seconds).  
Near-Reading :   Relax, breathe gently and place reading material at the nearest distance that is comfortable to read from.  Decrease 
distance very gradually each day (read for 30 seconds).  
Colours:   With eyes CLOSED look towards sun (or full spectrum light) fo r 30 seconds and then turn away.  Watch the colours in a 
relaxed and gentle way – massage eyes – watch colours again (for as long as is comfortable).  Repeat.  
Eye positioning:   Hold eyes in a relaxed fashion for 30 seconds in each direction - look up -left; look down -left; look up -right; look 
down -right; look through third eye/centre of eyebrows; focus on tip of nose; imagine looking at tongue.  Do not strain and look fo r as 
long as is comfortable. Increase time each day if comfortable (30 secs max.).  
Tramlin es:  Draw a circle with tramlines and place on a wall in front of you. Now circle the eyes clockwise round the train-line for 30 
seconds.  Repeat in an anti -clockwise direction.  
Dotting:  Draw a circle and randomly place a few dots within the circle.  Plac e the paper on a wall in front of you.  Now allow the 
eyes to randomly follow the dots in no particular sequence as in dot -to-d ot. Now do this with the eyes closed.  
The cat:  Bring the face of the cat and the body of the cat together by altering focus – go half cross eyes but while looking at cat in a 
relaxed fashion.  Don’t try too hard or strain – be relaxed and breath normally – this may take time to master.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 105 Caring for the eyes  
 
 
 
Netra program  
 
This program can be undertaken two or thre e times each year.  It is especially beneficial for Pitta types who are more 
prone to eye complaints and is indicated for eyes that are frequently tired, hot, achy or gritty.  Outside of this program, 
the application of ghee to the eyes should not be pract iced for more than two or three days consecutively, as this can 
allow the eyes to become lazy and may prevent them from producing their own lubrication.  
 
Instructions:  
 
Melt a small amount of ghee in your palms and apply to eye area (with eyes closed).  Op en eyes slowly and blink a few 
times so that ghee bathes the eyes.  
 
Week one  Practice every night before bed  
Week two  Practice every other night before bed (ie; three times during week)  
Week three  Practice every third night before bed (ie; twice during wee k) 
Week four  Practice four days after last application  
Week five  Practice five days after last application  
Week six  Practice six days after last application  
Week seven  Practice seven days after last application  
 
The idea is to gradually reduce the number o f times each week that you practice this procedure.  Thus, in the first week 
you are placing ghee in the eyes every night and by week seven you are only placing ghee in the eyes once during the 
week.  
 
 
 
‘The Willis technique’  
 
If your eyesight has become l ess focused when reading, or even if you use reading glasses for close up work, this simple 
exercise will help retrain your eyes to relax and focus again.  
 
Practice ‘palming’ (see eye exercises).  
Open a book with relatively large print.  
Slowly and easily ( without straining to see individual words) scan the page.  
After a while the odd word may jump out and be clearly visible.  
At this stage stop scanning and read the page.  
If you get a headache stop reading, close your eyes and practice palming for a couple o f minutes and then try again.  
 
Don’t worry if words don’t jump out at first, just persevere with this daily practice each day and eventually they will.  
The key is patience and a relaxed mind.  
 
 106  Balancing the female cycle  
 
 
 
Everyday women of all ages exp erience a need for relief from pre -menstrual, menstrual, pre -menopausal and 
menopausal symptoms. Conditions such as mood swings, cramps, excessive bleeding, irregular cycles, hot flashes, and 
seemingly insatiable cravings affect hundreds of thousands of wo men.  
 
Ayurvedic therapy is not based purely on the removal of symptoms; rather, it empowers the body to heal itself. In this 
regard treatment identifies and addresses the initial cause of PMS. The root cause of most cases of PMS begins early in 
the lifest y l e of a menstruating young woman.  
 
Charaka and the other Ayurvedic authorities state that the suppression of natural urges, stress, excessive sex and 
excessive physical exercise, along with an improper diet and lifestyle, are major contributors to the cau se of female 
reproductive disorders. There is a general consensus among Ayurvedic physicians as to why the excessive amount of 
female disorders plague the West and not the East, and it has much to do with honouring the cycle itself. In India, the 
menstrual  cycle is a highly respected cycle that is an expression of the female connectedness to the cycles of the moon. 
This lunar cycle regulates the tides, migrations, mating times and the twenty -eight day cycle of menstruation.  
 
Menses is a time when the femal e body provides extra energy to insure an effective and complete flushing of waste 
products. It is a natural time of cleansing and rejuvenation, traditionally accompanied by a time of rest or light duty. In 
traditional cultures there were extended families  that supported women during their monthly cycle and through 
menstruation. Whilst, in the West, this is rarely the case it does not mean that the modern working women cannot 
respect this time of the month by reducing stress and opting for a lighter work lo ad. Ignoring this cycle is often at the 
root of the premenstrual syndrome.  If there is some desire to rest during menstruation and this is not provided, then 
symptoms of some sort are sure to come about. Ayurvedic doctors generally recognise that the menst rual cycle and 
monthly cleansing is one of the factors that lead to the generally longer life span of women compared to men.  
 
The simple dietary and lifestyle adjustments recommended below can help offer relief from common premenstrual and 
menstrual syndro mes, and facilitate a smooth transition into menopause. A healthy cycle will also naturally enhance 
fertility.  
 
General recommendations:  
 
• Maintain a proper balance of rest and activity throughout the month. Rest during the period and practice 
meditation, pranayama, yoga and exercise.  
• Take 2 tbsp of pure aloe vera juice after meals twice a day, but not during or within 3 days of the end of the 
menstrual flow.  
• Perform a daily self -massage with warm sesame oil followed by a hot bath or shower. Pitta types sho uld use 
warm coconut oil followed by a warm shower.  
• Each day for seven days before the period begins do a self -massage, followed by a hot bath. Massage the 
abdomen in a clockwise motion during the bath.  
• On the seventh day before your period, follow your se lf-massage and bath with laxative therapy: On an empty 
stomach, take 30mls of castor oil mixed with ½ cup of apple or carrot juice. Do not eat until the majority of the 
laxative action has occurred (3 to 5 hours). Usually, this procedure results in 2 to 5 bowel movements. You 
may repeat this monthly for up to 6 months.  
• Eliminate caffeine as this can have a dramatic effect in women with fibrocystic breast disease.  
• Reduce or eliminate alcohol as this will reduce bloating and water retention in most women.  
 107 • If you have pitta or kapha symptoms cut back on salt, sour foods and dairy products as this will also help 
reduce bloating and water retention.  
• Eat stewed apples if you wish to relieve constipation.  
• Drink sweet ginger tea to help regulate disturbed or absent menses. Use raw honey or raw cane sugar.  
• Add saffron to meals to help regulate the menstrual cycle, relieve dysmenorrhoea and PMS, and promote 
fertility. Saffron is also a digestive aid and also helps relieve respiratory congestion.  
• Herbs that are known t o reduce symptoms associated with premenstrual syndrome, infertility, menopause and 
irregular or painful menstrual cycles include: Ashoka  which is astringent, sedative, haemostatic, and it is 
particularly good for those with an uncomfortably profuse menstr ual flow; Shatavari  which is a nutritive tonic 
and anti -spasmodic – it also contains glucosides which are a food precursor of estrogen. It helps bring on 
menses when one is experiencing amenorrhea (absence of periods); It is also commonly used for 
dy smenor rhoea (painful periods); Punarnava  which rejuvenates the endometrium and enhances the tone of the 
uterus. It has been traditionally used for endometriosis and fibroid tumours.  
Treatment of Vata Type PMS:  
Symptoms of vata imbalance , as they manifest in rela tion to the menstrual cycle include: nervous tension, mood swings, 
anxiety/depression; insomnia; forgetfulness/confusion; constipation; light amount of flow; menstrual 
pain/cramps/backache; extended length of period with dark, clotted flow; irregularity of  periods or flow . 
• Follow a Vata pacifying diet.  
• Chew fennel seeds after each meal to prevent gas and gallbladder congestion.  
• Drink fennel and licorice tea to help relieve PMS and regulate menstruation.  
• Take 1 tsp of castor oil every night for one month. Ta ke less if there is a laxative effect.  
• If you usually have a light amount of flow; menstrual pain/cramps/backache; extended length of period with 
dark, clotted flow; irregularity of periods or flow combine 2 parts shatavari, 2 parts musta, 1 part licorice,  1 
part punarnava. Mix 1 tsp of this combination with sugar and ghee and take 3x a day.  
• If you often have nervous tension, mood swings, anxiety/depression, insomnia, forgetfulness/confusion, and/or 
constipation, combine equal pts: brahmi, jatamamsi, ashwag andha, guduchi. Mix 1 tsp of this combination 
with water and take 3x a day.  
• For pain experienced during the period, application of heat externally to the lower abdomen is advised. This 
may be accomplished by massaging warm ripened sesame oil on the abdomen  followed by the application of a 
hot water bottle directly to the oiled skin.  
Treatment of Pitta type PMS:  
Symptoms of pitta imbalance , as they manifest in relation to the menstrual cycle include: irritability/anger; increased 
appetite; headache (especial ly migraine); excessive body heat or sweating; diarrhoea or increased bowel movements; 
skin rashes/acne; excessive menstrual bleeding; increased frequency of periods; bright red flow.  
• Follow a Pitta -pacifying diet . 
• Take 10mls ghee (clarified butter) with t en raisins daily . 
• Drink fennel and/or coriander tea during the day . 
• Take 2 parts shatavari, 1 part Ashoka,  1 part turmeric, 1 part brahmi. Take 1 tsp with water three times a day.  
• To decrease pitta and vata, take manjistha (1 -2g) three times a day after me als. 
 108 • Exercise moderately but avoid overheating.  
• Apply coconut oil to the head and feet at bedtime for more restful sleep and headache prevention.  
• Apply ghee to the nostrils for one week before the period.  
• Avoid overheating, hot water on the head, and over -exposure to sunlight.  
• When irritable or out of sorts  it is important to ensure that you are getting adequate rest.  
• Be sure not to take long hot showers or hot ba ths during your heavy flow days  as these tend to increase flow. 
Take a short shower or sponge bath instead.  
Treatment of Kapha type PMS:  
Symptoms of Kapha imbalance as they manifest in relation to the menstrual cycle include: weight gain; fluid retention; 
breast enlargement; abdominal bloating; acne; menstrual stiffness in back and joints; pale, mu cousy menstrual flow . 
• Follow a Kapha -pacifying diet . 
• Avoid overeating, especially at night and do not eat when you are not hungry.  
• A primarily vegetarian diet is highly recommended.  
• Include ginger in your daily diet: take a pinch of fresh ginger root with  a few drops of lemon juice before each 
meal. Spice food with turmeric, ginger, black pepper, and cinnamon.  
• Take a herbal mixture of equal parts: shatavari, ashwagandha, trikatu. Mix with honey into a paste and take 1 
tsp three times a day.  Also take 1 tsp Dashmula in 2 cups water and boil down to ½ cup; drink ½ cup two times 
a day. Dashmula is a Ayurvedic formula containing ten roots.  
• If you are prone to sluggishness, prepare a calamus nasya: combine ½ teaspoon calamus with 1 ounce sesame 
oil. Place 10 -15 drops into each nostril, three times a day.  
• It is especially important to get daily exercise. A brisk walk for 30 minutes is the minimum exercise required. 
Perform deep nasal breathing during exercise.  
• Do not sleep during the day unless illness or unusual  circumstances cause exhaustion. Always try to avoid 
sleeping within 2 hours after a meal.  
 109 How to keep your joints h ealthy  
 
 
 
To understand how to maintain proper health and function of the joints, we first need to look at their anatomy and 
physiology. J oints hold the bones together and are designed to provide movement within the skeletal system. The main 
function of bone is support, while the joints allow a certain amount of flexibility and to our structure. The synovial 
joints, where the ends of bone ar e connected by a joint cavity or capsule containing synovial fluid, allow freedom and 
fluidity in the articulation of our movements.  
The supportive tissues;  ligaments, tendons, and connective tissue, are kapha dosha, while the joint cavity or space where 
the bones meet is an element ruled by vata dosha. The joint capsule provides a container for the slippery synovial fluid, 
again a kapha substance that lubricates the ends of the bone surfaces and also accommodates a tough, protective 
covering into which the  ligaments and tendons can insert themselves. It is through the ligaments that nerve impulses are 
transmitted to the muscles signalling movement, a function of vata dosha.  
Healthy joint tissue and function are crucial to how we move and express ourselves t hrough our bodies. According to 
ayurveda, vitiated or disturbed vata dosha can create imbalance within the joints resulting in pain and discomfort. Most 
commonly affected joints are knees, ankles, elbows, wrists, fingers and toes. When there is an imbalanc e in the joints, it 
is important to discern whether or not the imbalance exists with or without ama, a sticky toxic substance. A simple test 
can be done with organic sesame oil. Massage the oil into the joint. If the symptoms are aggravated, then there is ama 
present, a condition known as amavata. If the symptoms are alleviated by the oil massage , o r  s t a y  t h e  s a m e ,  t h e n  t h e  
treatment will begin with the removal of the causative factors and balancing vata dosha.  
The dryness of vata can deplete the lubricatin g qualities of kapha and joint surfaces can become rough and brittle. 
Common symptoms of vata imbalance in the joints are dryness, popping and cracking, and muscle tics and spasms. 
Some common causative factors are jogging, jumping, excessive exercise, inj ury, consuming too many dry foods, living 
in a cold, dry climate and irregular eating habits and lifestyle. Entering the vata season of life of fifty years and older 
will also increase vata dosha throughout the body. Particularly during the vata season of autumn and winter, when the 
temperature becomes cold and the wind begins to blow, symptoms may become aggravated. Ayurveda offers simple 
guidelines and herbal remedies for supporting healthy function of the joints.  
A few lifestyle therapies for balancing e xcess vata in the joints are:  
• Maintain a regular schedule, sleeping and waking at the same time each day.  
• Abh yanga, self -oil massage every evening. Choose organic sesame or vata massage oil.  
• Massage medicinal Mahanarayan oil locally into sore, stiff joints . 
• Follow vata pacifying diet, taking meals at regular times each day.  
• Practice gentle yoga.  
In a condition of amavata, ama is carried by misdirected or vitiated vata into general circulation throughout the body. 
When it interacts with the kapha in the joi nt spaces, the synovial fluid loses its' highly viscous quality and changes into 
a sticky toxic substance. It can begin to block vital channels throughout the body that carry nutrients to the tissues and 
cause dysfunction within the joint. The immune syste m can begin to attack the ama stored in the joints causing an 
inflammation of the joint lining. Inflamed tissue can result in symptoms of excess heat, redness, pain, stiffness, and 
swelling. Acute inflammation, if left untreated, can cause damage or injury  to the joint and bone tissue resulting in a 
chronic condition. Untreated chronic inflammation can lead to degenerative disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Ama 
can be clotted together with dead cells which the immune system sweeps up. Because it can als o be so deeply embedded 
within healthy tissue, the immune cells can become confused by the similarity to that which it has been scavenging, 
unable to properly identify the toxic invader from the healthy tissue; an "autoimmune" reaction.  
The primary causes for accumulation of ama are improper diet, excessive exercise, exhaustion due to overwork, 
extreme worry, and the use of alcohol. It commonly occurs in cold, damp climates. For the condition of amavata, 
removing the causative factors and eliminating ama fr om the body are paramount. Treatment to balance the doshas and 
rejuvenate the joint and bone tissue ensues.  
 110  
 
Here are some additional lifestyle guidelines to help reduce ama and restore balance:  
• Favour warm, nourishing, easy to digest meals such as Kichar i (rice and lentil soup).  
• Include ghee  or flax seed oil in your diet as both are nourishing and anti -inflammatory.  
• Avoid white sugar and alcohol.  
• Use unprocessed, raw honey (uncooked) to help gently scrape away ama.  
• Avoid dairy, particularly ice cream and cheese.  
• Apply castor oil to sore joints and then apply a  heating pad to help reduce inflammation and scrape ama.  
• Keep the colon clean and empty bowels regularly each day.  
• Sip hot water and tea made from dry ginger root (or ginger tea bags).  
• Practice deep, abdominal breathing exercises ( pranayama ) to gently help to move toxins from the body.  
• Meditate daily for clarity.  
• Address any psychological disturbances or unresolved emotions.  
Herbs traditionally used to help increase the body’s digestive fire and enable  cleansing and expulsion of ama, while 
reducing inflammation and rejuvenating the joints include:  
• Guggulu – an anti -inflammatory with strong purifying and rejuvenating properties. Indicated for arthritis, 
rheumatism, gout, lumbago , disorders of the nervou s, respiratory, digestive and circulatory systems.  
• Guduchi - a broad spectrum pitta -reducing herb that destroys toxins and strengthens immunity.  
• Triphala - Amalaki, Bibhitaki, and Haritaki - the three fruits for detoxifying and tonifying the body.  
• Vidanga - a powerful herb which destroys ama (toxins).  
• Ashwagandha - an adaptogenic rejuvenative herb with anti -inflammatory properties.  
• Gokshura -  an anti -inflammatory and rejuvenative.  
• Turmeric - an anti -bacterial and powerful blood purifier with anti -inflammat ory properties.  
• Trikatu (ginger, black pepper and p ippali ) – a powerful digestive aids that i n cr e a s e s agni (digestive fire), help s 
burn ama and promote s circulation.  
 
 111 How to cope with a llergies  
 
 
 
Allergies, whether from food, pollen, dust, mould, or dand er, are typically a form of hypersensitivity reaction. The 
underlying causes of allergic symptoms are rarely from the allergens themselves, making proper Ayurvedic diagnosis 
essential. A main causative factor of allergies is a by -product of improperly dige sted food. This toxic substance, called 
ama, is manufactured in the digestive system and is absorbed into the circulatory system. Once systemic, ama can block 
and clog the channels of circulation.  
The removal of ama in the circulatory system will often pla y a primary role in the management of immediate allergic 
hypersensitivity. Depending on body type, the underlying cause of allergic hypersensitivities will vary. It should be 
understood that mental and emotional stresses are also common contributing factor s in a hypersensitive allergic 
response.  
Ayurveda compares the body to a field and allergens to seeds; if the land is not fertile, then any seeds that are sown will 
not sprout. The fertilizer is a toxic residue called ama - a sticky substance formed in th e digestive system from food that 
has been incompletely processed. It lowers natural immunity and increases receptivity to allergens. This toxic by -
product migrates to the body’s points of weakness, creating a vicious cycle by lowering resistance even more . 
Allergies to pollen and other plant materials also involve an imbalance of the Kapha dosha, which controls the lungs, 
sinuses, and fluid balance in the body. When Kapha is out of balance, exposure to allergens stimulates symptoms like 
watery eyes, sneezi ng, coughing and fatigue.  
Kapha’s strongest influence is during peak allergy season, March -June. The presence of ama can weaken the thymus 
gland or spleen; both of which contribute to the body's immune system and trigger allergic reactions. However, eating  
more of certain foods and herbs can help remove ama, bring balance to Kapha, and thus hold allergies at bay.  
The first step is to minimize chilled foods and high -fat dishes (such as cheese, yogurt and meat) and replace them with 
warm, freshly cooked foods , including plenty of asparagus and broccoli, both of which support the immune system. 
Then integrate the herbs turmeric and tulsi (or holy basil) into your diet.  
Turmeric activates the liver and strengthens the blood to help remove ama, and research shows  that turmeric's active 
ingredient, curcumin, has an anti -allergic effect. You can sprinkle a mixture of ground turmeric, cumin, coriander, bay 
leaf, and cinnamon in your food. You can also bring a cup of milk to the boil, remove it from the heat, add a ba y  l e a f  
and a pinch each of turmeric and cinnamon and then drink it warm.  
Holy basil strengthens the immune system, reduces ama, and helps remove environmental pollution from the body. For 
an effective anti -allergy tea, bring a pint of water to a boil, remo ve from the heat, and for five minutes steep five holy 
basil leaves, two pinches licorice, one bay leaf, a pinch of cinnamon, and a pinch of cardamom.  
You may also want to try this Ama -Reducing Program for one month:  
• Sip plain hot water every half -hour  
• Drink eight to ten glasses of warm lemon water each day  
• Avoid dairy and wheat and favour fruits and vegetables  
• Eat a big, relaxing meal at lunchtime and a lighter meal of soup for dinner  
• Exercise for at least half an hour each day  
• Retire to bed by 10:00 p m  
• Waking up with the sun  
If you are suffering from rhinitis or excess dryness, this is a Vata cause and would most likely respond well to the Vata 
treatments. If you are suffering from sinusitis, internal heat, or excessive irritability or anger, you may benefit from 
using the Pitta treatments. If you are suffering from congestion or fatigue, the best option may be to select Kapha 
treatments.  
Vata causes: The vata body type is susceptible to various hypersensitivity reactions. In the case of allergic rhini tis, a 
vata imbalance will cause excessive dryness in the body. When this dryness finds its way to the respiratory system and 
sinuses, the protective mucous lining will dry up. This natural protection acts as a filter, temperature buffer, and first  
 112  
 
 
line of allergic immunity. When this layer of mucous dries up, the airborne allergens of dust, pollen, and pollution act as 
irritants in the sinuses, evoking an immediate hypersensitivity response. The body’s natural response to these irritants is 
to lay down  mucous as a means of protection. The dryness alone will also trigger the body to produce mucous, making 
allergic symptoms a common vata condition. In this instance, allergic symptoms can be chronic and constant due to a 
deep mucosal dryness rather than a particular allergen. The vata body type is also particularly sensitive to lifestyle and 
daily routine. Most importantly with regard to allergens, the vata type must take the proper time to eat a large lunch in a 
relaxed atmosphere without the distractions of television, magazines, or phone calls. Such distractions aggravate the 
vata aspects of digestion, producing ama and hypersensitivity reactions.  
Vata treatments:  
• Nasya: sniff sesame oil deeply into both nostrils two to three times a day  
• Triphala: take ½  teaspoon per day on an empty stomach  
• Ginger root tea: take three to four cups per day; also; also chew small pieces as a lozenge  
Pitta causes:  The pitta type will be subject to an accumulation of heat in the body and blood. The heat is produced as a 
result of a physiological hyper -metabolic state needed to burn off the excess ama in the blood. This heat, as does all 
heat, will rise up in the body into the head and neck. When this heat rises up into the sinuses, the effect is one of dryness  
along w ith the  accumulation of impurities (ama) in the blood. The result of the dryness aggravates vata as we mentioned 
previously, and the excess blood ama aggravates pitta. The sinuses respond by acting as organs of excretion rather than 
secretion producing an allergi c response. The treatment for pitta -based allergic response is twofold. The blood must be 
purified with pitta -pacifying herbs and the dryness must be dealt with, as in the case of vata.  
Pitta treatments : 
• Take ½ teaspoon of cumin seed as a lozenge during th e day  
• Triphala: take ½ teaspoon twice a day on an empty stomach  
• Nasya: sniff coconut oil deeply into both nostrils two to three times a day  
• Turmeric powder: take ½ teaspoon with ¼ cup warm milk, three times a day after meals  
• Neem leaf tea: drink 3 -4 cups per day as a detoxifier  
Kapha causes:  The kapha body type is classically the most susceptible to allergies and kapha imbalances and is often 
mislabeled the causative factor in most allergic conditions. It is the nature of kapha to produce and h old onto  m o r e  
water, congestion and ama  however, and the treatment of kapha in all allergies is a common mistake. The symptoms of 
most allergic responses are kapha in nature with the production of congestion, fatigue, and malaise; but the CAUSE of 
these kapha symp toms may be vata, pitta, or kapha. This diagnosis is crucial. It is, however, very common for the cause 
and symptoms of an allergic response to be kapha in nature. In this regard, the treatment is straightforward with the 
focus on pacifying kapha with bitt er, astringent, and pungent herbs and spices, in order to remove excess mucous. 
Allergy treatments can become more complicated when multiple causes are present. Imbalances in vata and kapha, for 
example, can easily create chronic allergic symptoms. Treatme nt for each are opposite in nature, and care must be given 
to balance both kapha and vata at the same time.  
Kapha treatments:  
• Trikatu: take ¼ teaspoon with raw honey before each meal  
• Sitopladi: take ½ teaspoon with raw honey three times a day on an empty stomach  
• Licorice: take ½ teaspoon with warm water after meals  
• Maintain a liquid diet one day per week, as ama -reducing therapy. This diet generally consists of eating 
vegetables and fruits which have been put through a blender and liquefied. Meals can be taken at room 
temperature, warm or hot. The liquid diet is normally part of an Ayurvedic cleansing program; putting foods 
through a blender prior to ingestion puts less strain on the digestive system.  
 113 Stress free vacations  
(a few tips to help you enjoy ho liday travel)  
 
 
 
• Plan well ahead to avoid panicking and rushing about arranging last minute details.  
• Consciously make an effort to enjoy the journey to your chosen destination and take pride in the preparations – 
preparations are a chance to find out about  new places and new ways to travel while delays during travel are 
opportunities to meet new people and catch up on some reading.  
• Leave yourself time to wind down from work before you go away – take time to pack and relax for a few days 
before you depart.  
• Once you leave work, put the phone on answer, delegate and trust other people to make decisions and advance 
things on your behalf and, above all, don’t be tempted to phone in to check on how things are going.  Tell work 
colleagues not to ring you at home or  on holiday – it’s your rest and re -cooperation time.  
• Make sure you’ve got enough foreign currency – get it before you go to avoid rushing about at the airport or trying 
to find somewhere to exchange money at your destination.  Have your money, credit card s, passport, travel ticket, 
accommodation details and other crucial paperwork and telephone numbers somewhere together where you won’t  
forget them.  
• Rest, relax, exercise, eat healthily and meditate regularly during the week before you go away.  You’ll be a ble to 
settle into the vacation and enjoy it all the more if you’re already rested and fully prepared before you go.  
• Make sure your diet is as healthy as possible in the weeks before you go away – this ensures maximum immunity, 
settled digestion and loads of energy and vitality stored up to allow your holiday to be fully enjoyed.  The most 
important thing is to avoid any processed or refined foods (very few nutrients and lots of toxins for the body to deal 
with).  Avoid refined sugar (in most processed/refi ned/packaged foods), reduce salt (except Vata types), avoid 
white/brown bread and white pasta/rice (except basmati), avoid margarine (stick to butter, ghee or olive oil) and cut 
down on red meat and cold milk.  
• Favour organic produce for maximum nutrition a nd energy (you’ll eat less and they’ll be more tasty).  Favour fresh 
fruit and vegetables, whole grains ( rice, buckwheat, barley, millet, quinoa etc), homemade fruit/veg juices and 
small tasty salads.  Reduce tea/coffee and  alcohol and favour herbal teas a nd hot water with lemon or ginger.  
• Maximize the use of ‘superfoods’ such as wheatgrass (fresh or powdered), spiralina, chlorella, kelp, milk thistle, 
ginseng, ground sunflower/ pumpkin/linseed and almonds.  
• Set off for the airport with loads of time to spar e.  Take plenty of reading material to occupy your time if you are 
delayed in airports etc.  Enjoy the delays and don’t get angry or frustrated – use the time to your benefit – read, 
talk, eat early etc.  
• Once on holiday drink plenty of water (not ice -cold as this destroys your power of digestion and can lead to 
stomach upsets).  Eat only when hungry and avoid eating past the feeling of comfort – put less on your plate and 
wait five minutes before taking seconds – usually you don’t need any after that.  
• Pitta types should avoid too much sun and keep cool – plenty of water and a good sun cream.  Coconut oil or 
ghee/aloe vera with lavender oil helps soothe and re -moisturise the skin.  
 114 Tips for air travel  
 
 
 
Jet lag and travel sickness are due to a Vata imbalance  caused by excess movement and can be reduced or avoided by 
following the recommendations below:  
 
 
Before you fly:  
 
• Ensure adequate rest and a good nights sleep the night before travel.  
• Exercise, practice yoga, pranayama  and meditation  on the morning befor e travel.  
• Take ginger pickle before main meals in the week preceding travel.  
• Avoid cabbage, Brussels spouts, beans a nd other vata increasing foods for 24 hrs before you travel . 
• Massage sesame oil into the nostrils immediately before the flight.  
• Apply laven der or sandalwood essential oil to temples, ears and forehead.  
 
During the flight:  
 
• Sip hot water with ginger and lemon or peppermint.  
• Meditate for twenty minutes soon after take off and then again after every two hours flight time.  
• Apply lavender oil to h andkerchief and sniff periodically.  
• Avoid drinking alcoholic and cold drinks before and during travel.  
• Read a light novel rather than taxing the brain with work -related or hard -to-follow literature.  
• Listen to soothing music.  
• Take ‘No Jet Lag’ tablets ( www. wellness -shop.co.uk) and ‘Jet Ease’  tablets ( www.garden.co.uk) . 
 
After the flight:  
 
• Walk in nature and undertake some light exercise.  
• Practice yoga, balanced breathing (pranayama) and meditate in the early evening.  
• Have an early night.  
 
During the holiday:  
 
• Drink plenty of hot water (with lemon or fennel seeds) to maintain healthy, balanced digestion.  
• Practice yoga, pranayama and meditation each morning and evening.  
• Be sensible with the amount of time spent in the sun (cover up between 11am and 3pm).  
• Apply coconut oil to enhance your tan, prevent burning and help keep the skin moisturised.  
• Aloe Vera (or ghee) with a little lavender oil for sunburn.  
 
Before the return flight:   See ‘before you fly’  
 
 115 Chapter 6 
Balancing the  mind & emotions  
~ for peace and happ iness & a calm  and contented mind ~  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Life without goodness; good thoughts, good actions and good words  
is like the sky in the night without the moon or stars.  
It is like a wheel without a hub or spokes.  
No one can push a boulder away w hile standing on it  
- no one can be free from anxiety while all the entrances  
through which it sneaks in are open.”  
~ Atharva Veda  ~ 
 
 
 
 

 116 How to be happy & peaceful!  
 
 
 
The ancient Vedic texts of Indian philosophy abound with prescriptions for lasting peac e and happiness. The pages that 
follow synthesis a little of their teachings.  
 
• Past experiences, good or bad, are our greatest teachers; in fact they are our only teachers.  Brooding over past 
events and worrying about the future fills our minds with toxic waste; it is a useless pastime and drains our 
mental power. How we develop and refine our mind determines our success, fulfilment and happiness in life.  
 
• During every waking moment we have a choice; either stand back and quietly contemplate how to react 
appropriately to any given situation or to allow our lower instincts; our robotic, mechanistic instincts, to take 
over, without any thought or concern for the consequences of our actions. We always have the power to 
determine which  attitude to adopt – we can  either look at any negative or stressful situation as a crisis, a 
nightmare, a seemingly insurmountable problem or as simply an opportunity to learn and grow; it all depends 
on our chosen interpretation of the situation.  
 
• We all have the capacity to allow  ourselves to see the cup as half full or half empty – it is simply our response 
to events and situations that determines which it is to be. If we have the resourcefulness to cultivate inward 
calm , by controlling our negative thought patterns , the outer wo rld responds accordingly. All that is required to 
create a peaceful, harmonious outer experience is a bed -rock of inner peace and calm.  
 
• There are no mistakes or truly negative experiences in the relative world; it is just as it should be. To savour 
the ve ry best of life we must have savoured it’s opposite to know it for what it is. How can we truly experience 
pure joy and exuberance unless we know and have experienced its exact opposite?  
 
• Once we stop judging people, situations and circumstances as good or  bad, positive or negative, we can simply 
and pass ively experience them, learn fro m them, grow through them and become str onger, mentally and 
physically.  
 
• We need to remember that more often than not as one door closes another one opens. Without closing th e first 
door the other is unable to open – it is the letting go that enables the other to begin to manifest. If we wish to 
create a new reality we must first create new thoughts, for the foundation of our relative experience begins in 
the mind. It is our i deas about something that causes the outer reality and not the other way round.  
 
• The trick is to imagine, as vividly as possible, the outer experience or event we would like to create and then to 
allow the universe to take care of the details. If we cultiv ate an attitude of total expectancy , and allow dormant 
forces of true knowledge to awaken within us , we will be ready to clearly perceive the opportunities that 
present themselves. We will be able to react appropriately and decisively to them and thus ensu re their positive 
outcome. We must consciously and perpetually replace all negative thoughts with positive and uplifting 
thoughts. We must remember that if we are able to allow negative thoughts to dominate our thinking we can 
also allow ourselves to be do minated by positive thoughts; it is our divine birthright.  
 
• A weak mind leads to weak thoughts and actions . However, a strong and positive mind ensures success in the 
outer world and becomes a true measure of our success in cultivating inner peace and harm ony. Everything in 
life is first created first in the mind and then in our outer reality. If we take responsibility for our own thoughts, 
turning negative into positive, the world around us responds in a positive way. Inner peace and happiness is 
always re warded with a delightful outer experience. It is never the other way round.  
 
• The richness and quality of life is a reflection of the richness and quality of our thoughts so if we truly wish to 
have a wonderful and meaningful life on this planet we need to ensure we cultivate peaceful, meaningful 
thoughts. If we patiently expect a positive outcome we will surely receive it but only if we prepare our mind 
 117 first. We must believe that if we can think or dream of anything at all it is because we truly have the c apacity 
to realise it on an outward level.  
 
• Our minds have immeasurable power and can literally materialize anything we desire so long as we remain 
patiently focused on what it is we wish to have. Thus, we need to discover , through relaxed contemplation , 
what it is we truly want from our lives and then we must direct all of our attention towards it. If we can direct 
our intention and attention to our innermost desires , in a relaxed and concentrated manner , they will begin to 
manifest with ease.  
 
• If we delay  the process of cultivating our minds because we’re too busy pursuing other goals we’re never 
going to achieve true peace and happiness. If we have a leaky pipe in our home and we delay fixing it , t h e 
house may eventually flood and the small problem become s a hundred times worse. Or, if we do not take the 
time to backup our computer files each week , we may eventually lose them all and have to start from scratch 
when it crashes due to a virus or hardware malfunction. Similarly, each day we delay refining our  minds and 
pursuing our innermost desires , we push our peace and happiness further and further away.  
 
• Tiredness and lack of motivation also result when we fail to follow our inner dreams and desires. Once we are 
living and following our greatest dreams fat igue becomes a thing of the past, for every action then becomes  a 
source of fulfilment and joy. T his brings sharpness, clarity and motivation to our lives. Tiredness is our support 
for showing us what is not meant to be done by us, whilst energy and motiva tion shows us where we are 
ultimately meant to direct our energies for lasting success and happiness.  
 
• If we become accustomed to leading perpetually hectic, frantic lives we miss out on the pure joy of living and 
eventually become uncomfortable in peacefu l, harmonious surroundings and being with relaxed, happy people. 
More disturbing still is the fact that we also become uncomfortable when our own minds transcend towards 
peace and stillness. True peace and stillness becomes foreign to us and we consciously  or unconsciously try to 
avoid it. If we do not learn to control our mind at the earliest opportunity it begins to control us and we become 
a slave to its unruly, desire -ridden nature. If we cultivate inner silence and stillness , in mind and body , we will 
see it reflected in our outward life; we will begin to notice it in our surroundings and the people we meet each 
and every day.  
 
• The way we see and believe life will unfold , is the way it will unfold for us , so we m ust practice the art of 
‘seeing  in our mi nds eye ’ the way we wish to have these situations and events unfold. If we cannot see the 
target we will never be able to hit it; we need to form a clear mental image of the outcome and the clearer the 
mental image the more effective will be  the outcome. B y seeing the outcome in the present , rather than in the 
dim and distant future , allows  the results to come more quickly; imagine the success you desire has already 
occurred and that you are already reaping the rewards.  Also, by writing down our goals we br ing them to life 
simply through the act of committing them to paper. This act allows clarity of purpose and we then begin to 
consciously and subconsciously notice or seek out opportunities that allow them to develop. We must not let 
doubts or negative thou ghts get in the way – we must get into the habit of replacing  them with more positive 
thoughts the moment they arise. If we ponder on negative situations for long enough we allow them to start 
manifesting  –as we have begin the process of creating them.  
 
• One way of speeding along t he process of achieving our dreams and desires is to help others achieve theirs. 
The more we are in the field of success and achievement the more its energy is drawn to us and the faster our 
dreams can manifest into reality. By ack nowledging another’s purpose in life we also acknowledge our own. A 
life without purpose ceases to have any meaning and eventually withers away but a life lived with purpose 
grows and evolves in leaps and bounds. If we confidently work  towards our goals an d ambitions and aspire to 
do only things we really love to do , we will achieve lasting peace and happiness.  
 
• The key to a joyous and happy life is to quietly contemplate our dharma or ‘life -purpose’ and, having 
discovered where our heart lies, applying our  unique skills and talents towards achieving our purpose. We 
 118 must let go of any disappointments or setbacks along the way and rejoice in every tiny success we achieve. 
Therein we find the objective of life itself and begin to experience profound fulfilment  and happiness.  
 
• There are no limits in life other than the ones we set our self. We can change negative thought patterns and bad 
habits in an instant if we so desire. As long as we consciously direct our energy and motivation towards the 
goal we have set ourselves we can easily replace any negative thoughts and bad habits for with more life -
sustaining ones. However, we should never do anything just because we have to; we should act from our sense 
of knowingness and righteousness. If it is the right thing t o do we should do it without any hesitation 
whatsoever, acting from our divine intuition; our heart centre.  
 
• There is no situation that is inherently painful or pleasant outside of our perception of it. They are both 
conditioned responses based on past exp eriences. When we begin to realise this we move into a new arena of 
life; an arena of choice. Just because we experienced something a certain way in the past does not mean it will 
occur in exactly the same way again. If we react to a given situation with a nger or fear it is because we are 
basing our reasoning on past experiences; and past events do not usually pan out exactly the same way twice. 
In this circumstance we suffer from false thinking and act from a position of ignorance; we fall prey to a 
condit ioned response. We should aim to cultivate an attitude of non -attachment towards outer events and 
thereby prevent ourselves falling into the trap of fear and ignorance.  
 
• Rest, play and relaxation are as important to a successful and fulfilling life as anyt hing we can ever do or say. 
The amount of success we achieve in outer lives is in direct proportion to the level of peace and contentment 
we cultivate in our hearts and minds. Without lightness of spirit, love of life, appreciation of silence and mental 
clarity all our actions become ineffective and energy -depleting. The healthier our physical body and the more 
our minds are rested , the more strength and energy we have to direct into the outer world.  
 
• If we don’t recognize the value of rest, relaxation, med itation and prayer we cannot hope to achieve anything 
of any significance in our outer world. We may achieve great power and riches but it will have been at the cost 
of our inner strength, peace of mind and happiness. We must therefore take great care of o ur inner core; the 
bedrock of our existence, so that we have great strength and resilience to direct our energy into the world 
around us. A man who is rested and relaxed can direct twice as much energy to his home and work 
enviro nme nt , and can therefore ac hieve success in half the time and with half the energy it takes a man who is 
frantically busy and stressed all day long.  
 
• Everything in our relative world must have its equal and opposite and this is no different when it comes to our 
minds. The deeper the  mind is able to dive into silence on a regular basis, the higher, and faster and longer our 
mental faculties work. There are many ways of doing this including gentle exercise, yoga, breath awareness, 
dance, music, prayer, solitude and walking in nature on  a daily basis. However, the most powerful way to still 
the mind and release energy is meditation, which should be practiced for at least twenty minutes twice a day to 
be most effective.  
 
• For the mind to be stilled easily the body needs to be healthy and t his means good, wholesome fuel in terms of 
food and drink. The more fresh and natural our food the more energy our body has at its disposal; we are no 
more than the fuel (food) we put into ourselves. If our food is poor, our body and mind are weak. If our mind 
and body are weak our thoughts are also weak . If our thoughts are weak our choices become poor, weak and 
confused. Weak choices lead to poor decisions and consequently to poor, ineffective actions. Poor, ineffective 
actions do not achieve success and we end up tired, stressed, unfulfilled and unhappy. Therefore, the 
foundation of our existence is the food we choose to eat and the lifestyle we chose to lead.  The choices we 
make in this area ultimately determine our success or failure in life.  
 
• If we ch oose to eat meat we dull our mind , as meat is a heavy food and hard for the body to digest. The 
digestive system  uses most energy , and if it has to digest heavy foods , it leaves very little energy for our 
mental faculties. It also builds up heat in the min d and body , leading to anger and violence and also to 
inflammatory conditions such as gout and arthritis.  However, eating fresh organic fruit, vegetables grains and 
 119 pulses create energy, ojas and vitality – these types of food increase our prana or life en ergy and help us ward 
of stress. Old age and disease.  
 
• Simply by allowing time to reflect on our lives , and contemplating where it may be improved , i s  t o  s t a r t  a  
process whereby we may begin to discover joy in our lives again. The only way to improve our l ives is to be 
able to notice and acknowledge what we did wrong yesterday and then to make a commitment not to fall into 
the same trap twice. As we continue with this process our judgment becomes refined and our lives become 
more successful.  
 
• As we begin to  make positive changes we should remain alert to the consequences of these changes so that we 
know we’re on the right track. We may perhaps notice that on the days when we go to bed early, and 
consequently arise much earlier in the morning, we have more en ergy and are happier throughout the day. We 
may also notice that when we go to bed earlier we actually need less sleep. We may perhaps notice that when 
we take the time to stroll in the countryside we feel much better , and are more caring and friendly to t hose 
around us. We may also notice that when we are able to get some rays of sunshine on our skin each day, our 
bodies feel healthier and more alive. We may notice we have more energy and the mind feels sharper when we 
don’t eat meat, or that when we have a light meal in the evening we sleep better and wake more refreshed. 
Perhaps we notice that a little laughter each morning , or playing with our ch i l d r e n , releases ‘feel -good’ 
hormones in the mind and body and then allows us greater clarity and enjoyment of  the rest of the day.  
 
• As we begin to notice that as we change  our thought patterns our outlook on life becomes positive  and o ur self -
image improves.  As we clear away the clutter from the mind we uncover the true meaning of our lives and 
begin to prioritis e those things that matter and reprioritise those things that don’t. Life slowly begins to become 
more peaceful, less stressed and more fulfilling.  
 
• As we begin this process of renewal and rejuvenation of the mind our fear of failure also becomes less and less 
and stops draining our energy. Indeed, we finally realise that there is no real failure in life, only opportunities 
to learn and grow and become stronger in the process. As our energy increases , our willpower also increases , 
and we begin to find we ar e falling off the path of happiness and contentment less often . We may also find that 
we are more able to cope with the consequences when we do. This knowledge and strength gives us a great 
sense of freedom and feelings of inner power that allows us to sti ck to our new way of being more easily.  
 
• As we begin to be more self -referral and less ego based we become more self -controlled and more able to hold 
back when a situation demands it. A once angry response to a situation now becomes calm er and allows for 
more constructive ideas on how to resolve the particular situation. As we begin to achieve small victories over 
our restless minds we allow larger victories to be achieved in our outer world. We begin to understand that 
ninety -nine percent of our success co mes from using just one percent of our minds capacity and that ninety -
nine percent of our thought is pure junk anyway and serves only to interfere with the truth of any given 
situation.  
 
• If we can learn to laugh at our ourselves every once in a while , and not take life so seriously , we begin to 
notice that we are already surrounded by beauty and joy , and that our searching for happiness in the outer 
world was in vain; it was right h er e  in front of us all the wh i le . As we begin to see the world in a differen t light 
and start to pay less attention to our doubt s and fears we realise that failure is impossible. As long as we work 
steadily and consciously towards achieving our objectives, success is assured  and our desires are fulfilled . 
 
• However, o ur happiness i s just the journey on which we travel through life; it is not the final destination . When 
we allow ourselves to stop and savour each and every moment , pure joy  becomes our everlasting reality. When 
we stop chasing the desire for success and achievement in the outer world we begin to find it is already present 
in our quiet inner world. As we start to live more and more in the present moment we realise that happiness 
and joy were always with us. W e then become a source of pleasure and joy to ourselves and to those around us.  
 120 Key points for cultivating mental peace  
 
 
 
• Remember to g ently turn your mind away from negative/stressful thoughts and to place your attention on the area 
of the body where this negativity appears to be  felt.  Rest your attention on this area for a while, breathe into it and 
as the feeling fades , turn the mind to healthier, happier thoughts.  
• Remember that fear, worry and anxiety are the largest drain on the body’s energy levels and a major cause of 
illness and disease.  
• T r y  t o  l i v e  i n  t h e  p resent;  enjoying and savouring each precious moment.  Regret , or reminiscence of past events . 
drain your energy and hinder your enjoyment and appreciation of the present.  Accept what has been, what is and 
what may be , and enjoy each moment - for it comes only once.  
• Trust in nature and have faith that the future will work out fine when unhindered by stress and negative thought 
patterns.  
• Use positive language in verbal and mental communication with yourself and others.  Try not to use words such as, 
I can’t,  I should and I need and replace them with words such as; I can, I will, I must or I choose .  These words 
have more power of conviction and are more likely to be acted upon  
• Boost your confidence, self-worth and self -esteem by listing all the things you lik e about yourself, the things that 
make you unique and all the things you are good at.  
• Remember that it is only through self -confidence, happiness and inner harmony that you may pass joy and 
happiness to those around you.  Love and peace can only spread thr ough the world, affecting each and every living 
thing when we are happy and loving within ourselves.  
• Help yourself to help others by radiating love, peace, honesty, understanding and calmness.  Notice the beauty and 
gentle sounds of nature and spend time a ppreciating the rising or setting sun.  
• Be n on -judgemental and graciously accept the way things are.  Remind yourself often for it is the only way to truly 
begin to learn how to change oneself.  Practice acceptance and silently allow life to unfold naturall y  a n d  
effortlessly, accepting things as they are and not as you wish they were.  
• Learn to trust and act on your intuition, trying not to let the mind hinder your self -referral process with fear, doubt 
or anxiety.  Casually witness the choices you make each day and ask yourself what the consequences of making 
this or that particular choice might be.  Will acting on the choice you make bring fulfilment and happiness towards 
yourself and those affected by making that choice?  
•  Having now begun to accept the chal lenges life throws your way and also having begun to trust and act upon your 
intuition in response to them, it’s now time to also take responsibility for your actions.  This means not blaming 
anyone or anything for the situations you find yourself in and r ealising that each and every situation presented is an 
opportunity in disguise. It is an opportunity to observe, listen and learn and transform it into a great  benefit.  
• Relinquish the need to defend a point of view.  Try not to feel the need to convince or  persuade others to accept 
your point of view or to be rigidly attached to it.  This way, the mind is flexible and free.  It is able to move on, 
progress and learn.  
 
 
 
 121  Resolving inner conflict  & limiting beliefs  
‘The E nquiry’  
 
 
 
Here are a series of ques tions that you can ask yourself to enable you to delve into the heart of an y issue or problem that 
is troubling you. By thinking of the issue you would like to resolve and then asking yourself these questions the inner 
reality of the situation is often rev ealed. It is important to be really honest with yourself and to listen to your intuition . 
Ignore your intellectual mind and listen to your quiet, inner voice that would truthfully like to dissolve the particular 
issue in question, forever.  
First think of the particular situation, person, issue or problem that troubles you most at this present moment . Now 
create a statement regarding this situation, person, issue or problem that you think you have . Make the statement as 
clear as possible eg:  my boss makes m y job very stressful; my son shouldn’t play on the computer so much; my partner 
should help me around the house more often; my mother should be more understanding; if I had more money my life 
would be happier.  
 For each statement you come up with, ask your self: 
• Is it true?  
• Can I absolutely know that my statement or thought is true?  
• How do I react when I think this particular thought?  
• Who w ould I be without this thought?  
• What would I be like  without this thought ? 
Do not judge each answer too deeply; just be open -minded and relaxed and see what answer spontaneously appears. Try 
not to be too intellectual or rational and listen to your heart rather than your intellect. See what you really think and not  
what you may ‘think you should think’ or what others may ‘ think you should think’.  
• Now see if you can change  the original statement round  so it applies to yourself  rather than the other person.  If 
your statement was ‘my son should not play on the computer so much’ turn it round to say ‘I should not be on 
the compu ter so much’ or ‘I should not watch television so much’.  
Ask yourself if  this reversed statement is true or has any relevance on some level if you are very honest with yourself ?’ 
• Now turn the original statement round to it’s opposite and then apply it to y ourself.  You might now have ‘ I 
should be on the computer as often as I am’ or ‘I should be watching television as often as I do’.  
Ask yourself if this opposite statement could perhaps be true, especially at the present time ?’ 
• Now apply this new (opposite)  statement to the other person or situation. For instance the statement may now 
say ‘my son should be watching television so much’ or ‘my son does need to play computer games so often (he 
needs to distract himself from the fact his best friend has just bee n badly hurt in a traffic accident)’.  
Ask yourself if this new (opposite) statement could perhaps be true  on some level ?’ 
Below is a slightly expanded version of the above and may help you go deeper into the absolute reality of the statement s 
you create . Just ask yourself these questions and wait to see if a little clarity and understanding begins to dawn in your 
awareness.  
Create your statement and ask yourself:  
• Is it true?  
• What’s the underlying reality of it? (Does it really happen? Does he/she really do that? Am I really like that? 
Do I really do that?)  
• Whose business it is anyway? (Is not my business only my business and not his/her business? Is his/her 
business only his/her business and not mine?)  
• Can I absolutely know that this statement is true? (What  if I am wrong? Could I possibly be wrong in my 
judgment of this situation/issue?)  
 122 • What are the consequences of my statement?  
• What are the consequences of my interpretation of the situation/issue?  
• What does my statement mean for me and for the other person ? Am I a better person or a worse person for it? 
Are they a better person or a worse person for it?  
• What do I think I would have if things were the way I think they should be?  
• What’s the worst that could happen if my statement is really true?  
• What’s the “s hould”? (if there’s no should in the original statement then put one in). Where’s the proof that 
this should be so? Where’s the proof that things ‘should’ be any different than what they already are?  
• What have I to learn from this situation?  
• Will I be a be tter person or a stronger person from having learnt from this situation?  
• Am I going to live life more fully in the future from having resolved this issue?  
• Will I be happier if I drop this thought?  
Consider for a moment how you react when you think (or beli eve) the original statement? How much of your life is 
based upon it? What do you do and what do you say when you do and say you believe it?  
Now ask yourself:  
• Can I see a reason to drop this thought?  
• Can I find one stress -free reason to keep this though?  
• Who would I be without that thought? How would I be without that thought?  
Now turn around the original statement. Here is an example:  “Paul should appreciate me”.  
If you turn it around to yourself it becomes:  “I should appreciate myself” (it’s my job, not h is). 
Turning  it around to the other person it becomes:  “I should appreciate Paul” (especially when he doesn’t appreciate me).  
If you turn it around to the opposite it becomes:  “Paul shouldn’t appreciate me (unless he does)”.  
Now consider each of the questi ons below and work through ‘the enquiry’ again (if necessary) for each individual 
person. By slightly altering these questions they can also be applied to other issues or situations.  
• Who angers or saddens or disappoints me?  
• What is it about them that I did n’t or still don’t like?  
• How do I want them to change?  
• Why do I want them to change?  
• What do I want them to do?  
• Why do I want them to do this?  
• Do I need anything from them?  
• Why do I need anything from them?  
• What do they need to give me in order for me to b e happy?  
• What do they need to do in order for me to be happy?  
• What do I think of them?  
• Why do I think of them in this way?  
• What is it that I don’t ever want to experience with that person, thing or situation again?  
By simple asking yourself these questions  you begin to look at your circumstances and situations in a different light. 
The trick is to ask yourself these questions in a relaxed, non -judgmental way and then to notice the answers coming to 
you without much prompting. Be as light as possible and con sider the ways in which the initial answers could be 
reversed or turned ar ound. Try and allow your  more intuitive or sub -conscious mind to answer for you and just 
innocently ‘watch’ the answers appearing. Ask yourself these questions whenever negative thou ghts arise about any 
situation, circumstance or issue. You’ll soon find that you are able to stand back and witness these thoughts popping up 
in your awareness and be able to let them go as quickly as they fleetingly appeared in the first place.  
 
If you ar e interested in this line of enquiry we strongly recommend reading the book on which this material is based: 
‘Loving What Is’ by Byron Katie.
 123 Thought Field Therapy (Tft)  
 
 
 
Thought Field Therapy is a simple technique which involves tapping or pressing on e nergy points (marmas) to rapidly 
remove phobias, traumas, anxiety and depression.  This miraculous phenomenon can seem bewildering to the patient 
who has often undergone months and sometimes years of physiological counselling to control the problem; and of ten to 
little or no avail.  The technique has been developed and refined over the past twenty -five years through the dedication 
and perseverance of Roger Callahan, an eminent and highly successful American clinical psychologist.  Man y 
practitioners now clai m it has an amazing success rate of over 95%.  
At the heart of his theory is the belief that behind every emotional problem is an undigested thought or ‘perturbation’.  
In stressful situations our minds filter out anything we can’t cope with in order for us  to deal more effectively with the 
situation in hand.  However, the problem here is that if these issues are permanently blocked from our awareness and 
we are never given a chance to deal with , them they may eventually pop up as phobias, fears, anxieties t hat bear very 
little or no resemblance to the original problem or situation.  A mistake of the intellect during the stressful situation 
leads to a ‘perturbation’ in that particular ‘thought field’.  It can permanently cloud our judgement surrounding many 
seemingly unconnected issues and creates further stress and often causes ill health or dis -e a s e .   A s  t h e  p r o b l e m  i s  
simply a wrongly ‘tuned’ frequency connected with that particular past event , it follows that removing or ‘re -tuning’ 
that thought field will  resolve the issue very quickly.  
Ayurveda views the mind in a similar way and uses meditation to rectify imbalanced that are present.  Meditation 
involves introducing a sound into the body’s vibrational field.  This sound ‘resonates ’ within the vibrationary  blueprint 
of the person and entrains his/her vibrationary field back into balance.  During the practice of meditation the mind 
transcends through the various ‘perturbations’ or stresses and arrives effortlessly at a state of pure awareness or restful 
a l ertness.  This is the realm of pure un -manifest consciousness (the quantum level ) that is free from stress, imbalance or 
‘perturbation’.  As the mind is naturally drawn back from this quantum level to the manifest level of reality it entrains 
the mind back i nto a state of normality.  It infuses the mind with vibrant energy and ‘irons out’ perturbations – the more 
this takes place the more often these perturbations are dissolved and collapsed and the more balanced the mind/body 
becomes . 
While meditation releas es stresses/imbalances/perturbations on a daily basis and slowly dissolves accumulated mental 
debris Thought Field Therapy rapidly tackles specific and often extreme imbalances that are causing severe problems in 
the present.  The two therefore work hand i n hand to create balance and harmony in the physiology.  Meditation gently 
works away at dissolving perturbations that may cause problems in the future whilst Thought Field Therapy tackles 
perturbations that have become a problem and need dissolving or col lapsing quickly.  
Whilst it is advisable  to consult a qualified TFT practitioner if you have a severe problem, many people have cured 
themselves of simple or mild anxieties, fears and phobias using the ‘algorithms’ on the following pages.  
 
Please refer to R oger Callahan’s book ‘Tapping  the healer within’ for more in -depth information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 124 Thought Field Therapy Instructions  
 
 
 
1. Tune in to the thought field – this means thinking briefly about the problem you would like to resolve (a phobia, 
fear, anxi ety etc) and bringing the issue  briefl y  to the forefront of the mind.  
2. Obtain a SUD rating – this necessitates writing down a ‘subjective unit of distress’ – using a scale of 0 –10.  A 
ten would be very distressful when you think of the problem, whilst a si x would be less severe.  A zero would 
therefore indicate no distress when thinking about the problem to be dealt with – in this unique situation you 
would need to put yourself in an environment where a SUD rating could be made.  
3. Choose the algorithm which y ou deem most appropriate to the problem you wish to overcome and ‘tap’ the areas 
indicated – the correct sequence is very important but the ‘tapping’ point is approximate (use two or three fingers 
to cover the general area to be tapped)  
 
Thought Field Ther apy Codes (for use with algorithms on next page)   
eb  Tap eyebrow point (between eyebrows).  
e  Tap under eye (high on cheek bone).  
oe  Tap outside edge of eye socket bone about ½ inch from eye, near the temple.  
a Tap four inches below armpit (about level w ith nipple on men).  
c Tap collarbone point one inch below and right or left of collarbone notch (bottom of neck) . 
Lf Tap little finger point (on inside tip of nail nearest thumb).  
if Tap index finger point (on the thumb side next to the nail).  
th Tap thumb  point (outside edge next to nail).  
mf Tap middle finger (edge next to index finger).  
un Tap under nose.  
ch Tap on chin just under bottom lip.  
g Tap gamut spot on the back of the hand one inch from knuckles in valley between ring and little 
finger.  
9g Tap gamut spot with eyes open (5 taps), eyes closed (5 taps), eyes open, looking down to the left (5 
taps), looking down to the right (5 taps), whirl eyes one direction (5 taps), whirl eyes other direction 
(5 taps), hum short tune (5 taps), count aloud from on e to five (5 taps), hum tune again (5 taps).  
sq Repeat the initial majors sequence (ie., e, a, c).  
er Complete f loor/ceiling  eye roll (while tapping gamut spot).  Hold head level and look downwards 
towards the feet with the eyes – to a count of eight slowl y roll eyes upwards across floor, up wall and 
across ceiling as far as you can.  
pr Psychological reversal (reverses polarity of meridians).  PR spot is located on the outside edge of 
hand, midway between the wrist and base of little finger.  This is used i f the algorithms appear to 
yield minimal results.  
Mini pr  Tap gamut point about 15 times to reduce SUD if stuck around 2 -4. 
Cbb Collarbone breathing.  Use if stuck above SUD 1 -2.  Breathe normally – full, deep breath in and hold 
– let half out and hold - let rest out and hold – take half breath in and hold – release.  
 1. Simultaneously touch collarbone point (c) and tap gamut point (g)  
 2. Repeat on other collarbone point using same hand  
 3. Repeat on first collarbone point using knuckles of same two finger s 
 4. Repeat on other collarbone point  
 5. Repeat 1 -5 using other hand on collarbone points  
 
 
 
 125 Thought Field Therapy Algorithms*  
 
 
 
Most simple phobias/fear:        e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
Spiders, claustrophobia:        a, e, c, 9g, sq, er  
Simple anxiety/stres s:       e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
Addictive urge/general anxiety:       e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
“ “       e, c, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
“ “       c, e, c, 9g, sq, er  
“  “      a, e, c, 9g, sq, er  
Simple trauma: rejection, grief       eb, c, 9g, sq, er  
Complex trauma:         eb, e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
Complex trauma with guilt:       if, c, 9g, sq, er  
(add to complex trauma algorithm)  
Complex trauma with anger:       Lf, c, 9g, sq, er  
(add to complex trauma algorithm)  
Anger:         Lf, c, 9g, sq, er  
Guilt:         if, c, 9g, sq, er  
Simple relaxation:        er 
Negative behaviour        pr 
Abnormal clumsiness or awkwardness:      Cbb 
Inhalant type allergy reactions:       mf, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
Nasal congestion/stuffiness:       un, c, 9g, sq, er  
Lung problems:         th, c, 9g, sq,er  
Obses sion and OCD:        c, e, c, 9g, sq, er  
“        a, e, c, 9g, sq, er  
“        e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
Rage:         oe, c, 9g, sq, er  
Depression:         g (30-50 times),  c, 9g, sq, er  
Physical pain:         g (30-50 times), c, 9g, sq, er  
Embarrassment:         un, 9g, sq, er  
Shame:         ch, 9g, sq, er  
Panic/anxiety disorder:        eb, e, a, c, 9g, sq, er  
“ “       c, a, eb, c, 9g, sq, er  
“  “      a, e, eb, c, 9g, sq, er  
“ “       eb, a, e, 9g, sq, er  
“ “       e, eb, a, Lf, 9g, sq, er  
“  “      c, e, a, 9g, sq,  er 
Inability to visualise/overcoming addictions:      a, c, 9g, sq, er     (when SUD below 3)  
Jet lag (also try ‘west to east’ instead if necessary):      eb, c, 9g, sq, er    (east  t o west)  
        e, c, 9g, sq, er      (west to east)  
 
NB:  Perform psycholog ical reversal (pr) after first major sequence if t h er e  i s  no change in the SUD level . 
         Perform mini psychological reversal (mini pr) after the second sequence if t h e SUD level is above 2 . 
 126 Accomplishing goals  
 
 
 
If you feel overwhelmed , indecisive  or stressed it’s time to take stock of the situation and ascertain the reason s for your 
problems.  It’s time to put your life back into order and to re -assess your goals and priorities.  The following 
instructions and priority chart are a very simple and e ffective way to go about accomplishing this.  
Evaluate your goals : 
• First d ecide what your goals are in life.  
• Now divide the list into short, medium or long -t er m goals .   
• Remember to u se positive language  and exchange: try, should or want , for: can, must and  will. 
• For each goal state the reas on why it’s important to you. T hese can be either negati ve or positive statements as 
they can  e i t h er ; create greater pleasure or happiness, or ; reduce pain and unhappiness . 
• Write down how each of these will be achieved  or advanced  or maintained and in what timescale.  
• Now commit to advancing or implement ing at least one, if not all, items in this list in some way each day.  
• Review the list e ach day and change the order of priorities depending on circumstances – be flexible a nd 
advance any items o n this list as opportunities spontaneously arise.  
• Re-evaluate this list periodical ly and be prepared to change it in light of new valu es or beliefs.  
• Remember to rest and relax and take some time to yourself each day , so that you are a ble to notice 
opportunities when they do arise , and to be able to act on them effectively  and efficiently.  
• Remember the Ayurvedic maxim: ‘Do less and accomplish more’.  
Evaluate your priorities : 
• To evaluate priorities for your goals use the chart below.  
• Try and place each goal into one of the four boxes.  
• The descriptions on the right of the boxes will guide you as to how you should deal with each priority.  
• This technique  can be really useful for day -to-day tasks in the home or office - you may need to be rut hless at 
times , but this will pay off in terms of reducing your stress and anxiety levels.  
 
          Time management priority chart  
 
Top Left  (section 1): These have to be dealt with as a matter of 
priority; there’s little choice involved and they are, therefore, often 
stressful.  As life becomes more structured and orderly this section 
should have less and l ess in it. The items that would go in here should 
have been foreseen and addressed in section 2.  
Top Right (section 2): List here all the things that are important to you 
and have a positive, life -enhancing effect on you - socially, 
professionally and pers onally.  These are things that make you , and 
everyone else around you , happier, healthier and more fulfilled . They 
improve relationships at home , and at work.  As this list is calmly and 
efficiently advanced, there should be less and less tasks to go in th e 
box to the left (urgent & important) . 
Bottom Left  (section 3): These are things often imposed on us by 
other people (deadlines etc) and need not impact your life if you so 
choose.  They are other people’s priorities and should remain so.  
Bottom Right  (section 4): Delete them . Any items listed in here can be 
banished from your mind - they need not impact or concern you in any 
w a y .  
 
  
 
 
Section 1  
 
Urgent  
Important  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Section 2  
 
Not Urgent  
Important  
 
 
 
Section 3  
 
Urgent  
Not Important  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Section 4  
 
Not Urgent  
Not Important  
 127 Starting your Ayurvedic lifestyle  
 
 
 
The best way to begin integrating an Ayurvedic lifestyle is to introduce it gradually; s tep by step. Start with things you 
know will be relatively easy for you t o do without radically changing your existing habits or lifestyle. Once you have 
introduced one or two changes , and found them beneficial, introduce a couple more. Try to be patient a nd refrain from 
introducing mo re changes until the ones you’ ve already incorporated have become fully integrated into your daily 
lifestyle. Don’t worry if you can’t follow them all of the time; just do as much as you can. In this way, the changes 
you’ve ma de will become second nature , and your friends and family will accept that this is the new you , and leave you 
to get on with it. Below is a suggested monthly plan.  
 
 
Month O ne  
 
• Retire to bed before 10pm (you can do this gradually by going to bed 10 minutes  earlier than normal for one 
week. The following week, go to bed 10 minutes earlier again , and continue in a similar manner until you 
reach your target ). 
• Arise one hour before dawn  (you can do this gradually by getting up 10 minutes earlier than normal for  one 
week. The following week, get up 10 minutes earlier again, and continue in a similar manner until you reach 
your target).  
• Meditate for 20 minutes after your morning shower and before your evening meal.  
• Practice the ‘Sun Salute’ for 5 minutes before me ditating.  
• Scrape your tongue with a tongue -scraper before brushing your teeth.  
• Aim to drink at least 2 -3 pints of hot water each day (with lemon, ginger or peppermint).  
 
Month Tw o  
 
• Continue following the practices you have integrated into your life in mont h one and reflect on the benefits 
you have noticed so far.  
• Eat your largest meal of the day at mid -d a y . 
• Eat a light meal (ideally soup) before 7pm in the evening.  
• Take ‘ginger pickle’ before your mid -day meal to increase appetite and help digestion.  
• Choose  the appropriate ‘churnas’ for your body -type and/or season and sprinkle on your food to balance the 
tastes and  increase assimilation of food.  
• Cut down on (or eliminate) your consumption of one or two of the following addictions: tea, coffee, sugar, 
confec tionary, sweets, chocolate, smoking, alcohol, watching television.  
 
Month Three  
 
• Continue following the practices you have integrated into your life in month one and two and reflect on the 
benefits you have noticed so far.  
• Cut down on (or eliminate) your c onsumption of meat and/or dairy products.  
• Choose foods that are appropriate for your body -type and season.  
• Stop buying processed, micro -waved, low fat and refined foods.  
• Drink no more than one cup of hot water with meals or immediately after meals.  
• Avoid i ced drinks and ice -cream (especially during or immediately after meals).  
• Cut down further on (or eliminate) your consumption of one or two of the following addictions: tea, coffee, 
sugar, confectionary, sweets, chocolate, smoking, alcohol, watching televis ion. 
• Take a 10 minute walk in nature each day.  
 
 
 
 128  
 
Month Four  
 
• Continue following the practices you have integrated into your life in the previous three months and reflect on 
the benefits you have noticed so far.  
• Massage your body with sesame oil before b athing or showering.  
• Massage your hair and scalp with coconut oil before bed.  
• Practice 5 minutes of pranayama before meditation.  
• Practice 10 minutes of yoga before pranayama.  
• Cut down further on (or eliminate) your consumption of one or two of the followin g addictions: tea, coffee, 
sugar, confectionary, sweets, chocolate, smoking, alcohol, watching television.  
 
Month Five  
 
• Continue following the practices you have integrated into your life in the previous four months and reflect on 
the benefits you have not iced so far.  
• Exchange your cosmetic products and toiletries for less toxic ones (see resources).  
• Read some inspiring, motivation, personal development or spiritual literature each day.  
• Increase your practice of yoga to 20 minutes each day.  
• Aim to become le ss argumentative, judgemental and controlling of yourself and others.  
• Have a day to yourself each week with plenty of rest and relaxation (and maybe a liquid fast).  
• Take a 20 -30 minute walk in nature each day.  
• Cut down still further on (or eliminate) your consumption of one or two of the following addictions: tea, 
coffee, sugar, confectionary, sweets, chocolate, smoking, alcohol, watching television.  
 
 
Month S ix  
 
• Continue following the practices you have integrated into your life in the previous five months  and reflect on 
the benefits you have noticed so far.  
• Practice the ‘healing sounds’ for 5 -10 minutes each day.  
• Eat a purely vegetarian diet most of the time.  
• Go on a panchakarma detox retreat for 7 -10 days to rejuvenate and revitalise the mind and body.  
• Start an on -going Rasayana program taking Triphala and Chywanaprash (Amrit Kalash) daily.  
• Buy an auger, masticating -type juicer and start drinking fresh, organic vegetable/fruit juices every day. Choose 
juices you like and are suitable for your body -t y p e .  
• Fast on Peya soup  for one day a week.  
• Eat mainly organic produce and cook it fresh each day . 
• Cut out tea, coffee, sugar, confectionary, sweets, chocolate, smoking and alcohol from your life.  
 
During the following six -months slowly integrate more of these sug gestions if you haven’t been able to already. Do not 
be too hard on yourself. Give yourself a reasonable time frame and accept that this may be much longer than is 
suggested here. It may take years until to can fully integrate everything but at least follo w the most important ones; 
meditation, early nights and early mornings, exercise, drinking hot water and having light meals in the evening. It is 
worth noting that you may experience mild side effects such as headaches or loose bowels when you begin to cut  back 
on toxic substances like alcohol or coffee. This is not a cause for concern; it is just your body beginning to detoxify. 
However, drinking lots of hot water will help lessen these symptoms and you can always cut back less drastically on 
these substan ces to integrate the change more smoothly.  
 
 
 
 
 129 Chapter 7 
Mantras  & healing s ounds  
~ for success, fulfilment, health,  wealth & enlightenment  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whe n w e find delight within ourselves  
and feel inner joy and pure contentment,  
there is not hing left to be done.  
~ Bhagavad Gita  ~ 
(Chapter 6 Verse 8   - 500BC ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 130 Introduction  to mantra chanting  
 
 
M a n t r a  i s  a  p r ofound and practical method of accessing higher states of consciousness . It is a form of yoga which uses 
vocal  and mental sound -currents of both audible and inaudible frequencies. These subtle vibrations awaken dormant 
centres of the brain , attuning the mind and body to the primordial vibration s of creation. Access to u niversal knowledge 
or truth, and spontaneously self-healing , natura lly arise  when we come into harmony with these sub-atomic pulsation s 
in consciousness.  The subtle harmonic vibrations of chanted mantras, both mental and vocal, act as a cleansing and 
purifying agent on consciousness. The  yogic rishis of ancient India discovered that certain sounds brought them joy and 
ecstasy whilst others illumined the consciousness or brought tremendous psychic powers . Some produced profound 
tranquility or boundless energy  and others brought freedom from fear  or mental and physical heali ng.  
 
These same m antras are still in use today a nd they still evoke the same results in those who are dedicated to practicing  
them  regularly . Mantras create a stable core in the centre of our beings, which vibrates in unison with the underlying 
life force . In India, it is not unusual for homeopathic doctors to prescribe specific mantras instead of the usual remedies. 
In Africa witch -doctors have known for centuries that a certain frequency of drum -beat will serve to break a fever and 
have developed a reper toire of other rhythms to cure various physical and mental symptoms. Similar methods are used 
today by advanced radionic practitioners using sophisticated instruments. Even in allopathic circles, sound -therapy is 
beginning to be utilised in the treatment o f both physical and mental problems.  
 
It is only relatively recently in the Western world, that it has been discovered that certain music and sound -waves have 
the capacity to activate cellular healing when played to bodily wounds. And such sounds have been  shown to promote a 
far speedier return to health than by orthodox methods. So it is that medical science begins to vindicate the findings  of 
the ancient sages.  
 
What is an ordinary dose of allopathic medicine after all? It is no more than a substance comp osed of atomic particles in 
a dense state of vibration. Homeopathic medicine goes one step further. Its highly diluted remedies appear to contain 
nothing of the original substance, yet they are highly potentised and radiate a powerful frequency which can r eplicate 
the effects of the disease. This causes the body to throw off its illness without the effects of harmful drugs, simply by a 
sympathetic frequency. A sonic frequency works on a similar principle.  
 
Medical researchers in Paris have found that certa in repetitive sounds played to cancer cells will eventually destroy 
them. If lifeless repetitive electronic sound can make cancer cells disintegrate in the laboratory, how much more 
effective the living sound of one’s own voice can be in toning the cells w ith the r epetitive vibration of healing.  
 
Mantra is known for its vibrant pulsation of subtle healing frequencies which purify both mind and body. Because of its 
capacity to resonate in consciousness, it is considered by the great sages as the most efficac ious method of unburdening 
the subconscious and cleansing it of residual traumas. As many cancers can be traced back to unfelt feelings blocked in 
childhood, mantra (with its internal massage of rigid cellular structures) often allows such frozen pains and  tears to be 
released. On occasion even traumas of previous lifetimes have been experienced following a mantra session, allowing 
students to relive and release past -life memories which previously created hidden tensions in the body.  
 
It is hardly surprisin g that mantra c hanting also has a significant effect on our mind and body as, l ike everything else in 
this universe, our body is made up of vibrating energy. Even though our body appears to be dense, every cell of the 
human body has its own frequency. Ther e's a sound present in each tiny cell, however minute that cell might be. 
Wherever there's movement, wherever there's vibration, there's sound. The body's inclination is to be in harmony with 
itself. All the different parts of the body, all its cells, want  to move in unison, the way a shoal of fish or a flock of birds 
does, always moving but never bumping into each other. When this natural rhythm and ha rmony is disrupted in the 
body , disease and disorders arise. However, when the vibrations of a chant sound  within our bodies, the cells 
themselves respond; they resonate with the pure vibration of the mantras so that harmony can be restored. The mantras 
and chants on the following pages are just a short selection for you to experiment with.  
 
 
 131 Maha mantras  
 
 
Lakshmi mantras  
 
Oṁ shrīṁ klī ṁ laksh mī, nārāyanābhyāṁ nama ha 
 
Brings good fortune, wealth, health, beauty, abundance and peace . 
 
Oṁ guṁ shrīṁ maha Lakshmiyei sw āhā 
 
Removes karmic obstacles related to abundance and attracts finances or prosperity . 
 
 
Gan esha mantra  
 
Oṁ guṁ  Gana patayai namaḥ  
 
Removes mental and physical obstacles and ensures success in endeavours . 
Heralds auspicious new beginnings and grants  education, knowledge, wisdom and wealth . 
Destroys vanity, selfishness and pride . 
 
 
Gayatri mantr a 
 
Oṁ bhūr bhuva h swāhā 
Tat savitur vare ñyam 
Bhargo devasya d īm ahi  
Dhiyo yo na ḥ prachoday āt (oṁ – swāhā) 
 
Increases intelligence, concentration, memory, strength,  intuition, inspiration  and creative thinking . 
Ensures success in endeavours, gives spiritu al insight and b rings enlightenment . 
 
Maha mrityunjaya mantra  
 
Oṁ tryamb hakaṁ yajāmahe  
Sugandhiṁ puṣ hṭi-vardhanam  
Urvārukamiva bandhanan  
Mṛityor muk shīya māmṛtāt …swāhā  
 
Creates peace and contentment and w ards off fear, sorrow and depression .  
Destr oys anger, selfishness and vengeful thoughts and removes sins and bad karma . 
Bestows life-giving energy and rejuvenates the mind and body to ensure a long and fulfilling life . 
Blesses one with good health and has great curative power during ill health . 
Ensures spiritual and material wealth and helps one attain Moksha  or enlightenment . 
 Guards against untimely death  and p rovides protection from accidents and mishaps . 
 
 
Dhanvan tre mantra  
 
Oṁ dhaṁ Dhanvantaraye n amaha  
 
H e l ps fin d an  a p p ro p ri at e p h y sic i an  o r p rac ti ti on er f or gu i dan c e du rin g he a lt h p r obl em s . 
H e l p s  f i n d  t h e  b e s t  p a t h  t o  h e a l i n g  o r  best resolution to a medical problem . 
 
 
Kubera mantra  
 
Ha Sa Ka La E I La Hr īṁ 
Ha S a Ka La E I La Hr īṁ 
 
Helps attain great wealth that, once achieved, will be self -sustaining . 
Safeguards money or investments for others . 
 
 
 
 
 
 132 Shiva mantra  
 
Om sarva kamadaya n am aha  
 
Helps fulfil our individual desires . 
 
Mani mantra  
 
Om mani padme h um 
 
Unites the light of the heart with the power of the mind to make anything possible ,  
Pu ll s en e r g y f ro m t he  l ow e r c ha k r as  in t o t he  u p pe r on es an d c irc u l at es en e r g y a r ou n d t h em , 
As with the Gayatri Mantra, when this mantra is chanted by anyone, all of humanity is benefited . 
 
Dattatreya mantra  
 
Oṁ dram om guru Dattaya n amaha  
 
Helps sharpen your skills as a spiritual counsellor and teacher, as well as moving your personal dharma forward . 
 
Vasudeva mantra  
 
Oṁ namo b hagavate Vasudevaya  
 
Helps obtain spiritual freedom and understanding  by building  links between conscious divinity at every level of creation and our own ego -based 
c on sc i ou sn e ss . Acts as a vehicle for uniting with divinity anywhere in the cosmos . 
 
Tara  mantra  
 
Oṁ tara tuttare ture swaha  
 
A Tantric healing mantra for gaining omniscient a wareness and strengthening feminine creative energy . 
 
Taraka rama mantra s 
 
Shrī Rām, Jai R ām, Jai Jai R āmo 
 
A mantra to evoke the healing energy of the sun and bring peace, harmony and enlightenment. Helps transcend karma and purifie s the ego and 
personali ty to gain spiritual freedom. Allows the divinity within to solve and handle our problems in life . 
 
Chant to the guru  
 
Gurur brahm a, gurur vishnuh, gururdevo maheshvarah,  
Guruh sakshat parabrahm a tasm ai shri gura ve nam ah  
 
Salutations to the Guru who is Bra hma, the Creator, Vishnu, the S ustainer, Shiva, the Destroyer,  
a nd  t o  t h e  m a n ife s t a t io n o f t h e  Sup r e m e  A bs o lu t e .  To  H im , t o  t h e  g lo r y  o f t h e  G u r u,  I  bo w  d o w n.  
 
Teacher/student prayer  
 
Oṁ saha n ā-vavatu, saha nau bhunaktu,  
saha v īryaṁ k a r a v ā-vahai, tejas vi nā vadh īt a m a s t u  
mā vidvis hā-vahai  
Om shanti shanti  shantih i 
 
O m . Ma y  w e , g ur u a nd  d is c ip le , be  p r o t e ct e d  t o g e t h e r .  Ma y  w e  e n jo y  t h e  f r u it s  o f o ur  a ct io ns  t o g e t h e r . Ma y we achieve streng th  together .  
Ma y  o ur  k no w l e d g e  be  fu ll  o f  lig h t . Ma y  w e  ne v e r  h a v e  e nm it y  fo r  o n e  a no t h e r . O m , Pe a ce ,  Pe a ce , Pe a ce .  
 
Meal  prayer  
 
B r a h m ārpanam, brahm ahavir, brahm āgnau, brahm a ñā h u t a m  
Brahm aiva tena, gantavya ṁ, brahmakarmasam ād h i nā 
 
Br a h m a n  ( G o d )  is  t h e  o b lation; Brahman is the melted butter (offering); by Brahman is the oblation poured into the fire of Brahman;  
Brahman verily shall be reached by him who always sees in  a c tio n.  
 133 Planetary healing & protective mantras  
 
 
Oṁ Ar kāya namaha  
This is healing mantra and offers respect to the divine physician, Arkaya  
Oṁ Hi r a ny agarbh āya namaha  
This is a mantra to heal the heart and emotions  
Oṁ rām Rāmaya n am aha  
This mantra balances and heals our solar & l unar energies and brings energy and vitality  
Oṁ duṁ Durgā ya nam aha  
This is a mantra for protection  from negative forces both internally and externally  
Oṁ shrīm  maha Laksh myai s waha  
This mantra blesses us with spiritual and physical abundance and prosperity  
Oṁ aīṁ shrīm  brīm Saraswati devyai n amaha  
Saraswati m antra f or giving knowle dge, beauty, peace and gentleness  
Oṁ namah Shivāya  
Shiva m antra for cultivating great yogic powers, inner strength, fearlessness and detachment  
Oṁ nam o N ārāyanāya 
Vishnu m antra f or bringing bliss , divine light and unconditional love  
Oṁ shanthi, shanthi, shanthihi  lokah samastah sukhino b havantu  
Prayer for world peace and prosperity  
Oṁ shrī Suryayā n am ahā  
Sun mantra which heals and balances the energies of the heart, spine, diaphragm, thymus, blood and veins  
Oṁ shrī Chandraya n amahā  
Moon mantra w hich heals and balances the energies of the all bodily fluids  
(perspiration, gastric, lymphatic  and nervous system, stomach and  breasts)  
Oṁ Budhayā n amahā  
Mercury mantra which heals and balances the energies of the  hand s, arms, lungs, sensory organs and t hyroid  
Oṁ Shukrayā n am ahā  
Venus mantra which heals and balances the energies of the  neck, throat, thyroid, kidneys, feet  and sex organs  
Oṁ Angarakayā n amahā  
Mars mantra which heals and balances the energies of the  blood, adrenal glands and sex organs  
Oṁ Gurave n amahā  
Jupiter mantra which heals and balances the energies of the  liver, gall bladder, thighs, pituitary gland and promotes growth  
Oṁ Shanaishwarayā s wāhā  
Saturn mantra which heals and balances the energies of the  skeleto n, cartilage, skin, lower  legs and pituitary gland  
 
 134 Planetary strengthening & vastu mantras  
 
Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya  
Strengthens the Moon’s energies and rectifies defects in the northwest of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate buddhadevāya  
Strengthens Mercury’s energies and rectifi es defects in the north of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate vāmanadevāya  
Strengthens Jupiter’s energies and rectifies defects in the northeast of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate rāmachandrāya  
Strengthens the Sun’s energies and rectifies defects in the east of bui ldings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate para shurāmāya  
Strengthens Venus’s energies and rectifies defects in the southeast of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate narasiṁhāya  
Strengthens Mars’s energies and rectifies defects in the south of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate varāhade vāya  
Strengthens Rahu’s energies and rectifies defects in the southwest of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate kūrmadevāya  
Strengthens Saturn’s energies and rectifies defects in the west of buildings  
Oṁ namo bhagavate matsyadevāya  
Strengthens ketu’s energies and  rectifies defects in the entrance of buildings  
Oṁ mahā - bhagavatāya vas tu-purus hāya svāhā  
Strengthens the Vastu Purush and the ether element in the centre or Brahmasthana of buildings  
 
Chakra mantras  
 
These seed syllables allow us to balance our chakras (energy centres ), senses and tissues.  
 
 
     Mantra               Element                       Sense                 Tissue            Chakra  
LAṀ (lamng)  Earth  Smell, Nose  Muscles  Root Chakra  Muladhara  
VAṀ (vamng)  Water  Taste, Tongue  Fat tissue  Sex Chakr a Swadisthana  
RAṀ (ramng)         Fire             Sight, Eyes Blood  Navel  Chakra  Manipura  
YAṀ (yamng)          Air       Touch, Skin  Plasma  Heart Chakra  Anahata  
HAṀ (hamng)  Ether         Sound, ears Prana  Throat Chakra  Vishuddha  
A (a-a)          Cosmi c mind  (Mind)  Third Eye  Ajna  
OṀ (Omnnn)         Pure consciousness  (Head)  Crown Chakra  Sahasrara  
 
 
 
 
 135 Bija Shakti Mantras  
 
These are powerful mantras for general healing, energy and transformation purposes.  
They allow us to unify with Shakti (the realm of  pure consciousness).  
 
Oṁ 
 
This is said to be the most important mantra as it serves to energize or empower everything in the universe. For this 
reason, all mantras begin and end with the sound of OM. Chanting this sound helps clear the mind, opens the ch annels 
of perception and increases our life -energy or Ojas. In ancient books OM is said to be the sound of the Sun and carries 
the energy of Prana on its breath.  
 
Shrīṁ 
 
Shrim (shreem) is a mantra of love, devotion, health, beauty, creativity and prosperit y. It awakens the heart, engenders 
faith and gives steadiness to our emotional nature. It promotes general health and aids in fertility and rejuvenation.  
 
Hrīṁ 
 
Hrim (hreem) is a mantra of cleansing, purification and detoxification. It gives energy, joy an d bliss and has creative and 
healing powers that awaken us, at a soul or heart level, to the divine forces of love and attraction. It increases our 
aspiration and receptivity to divine light, wisdom and truth and opens the lotus of the heart to the inner S un of 
co nsciousness.  
 
Krīṁ 
 
Krim (kreem) gives us motivation, energy, power and efficacy for work and action. It is good to chant while making 
preparations as it allows them to work better. It brings spiritual awareness and power by arousing kundalini and 
opening the third eye. I t can stimulate and transform the lower chakras and helps awaken and purify the subtle body. 
Krim is the thunderbolt or vajra of Indra that destroys the serpent of ignorance and releases the light of absolute truth.  
 
Huṁ 
 
Hum is a mantra of Agni or fire an d helps enkindle our inner fire or thermogenic force and our digestive fire. It also 
represents the soul hidden in the body and calls the divine down into us . It may be used to destroy negativity and create 
great passion and vitality. It governs the earth and the material sphere in general and can be used to invoke divine grace 
and protection through which we can offer ourselves or our afflictions into the divine for purification and 
transformation. It is the best mantra for warding off negative influences attacking us, whether disease -c au sing 
pathogens, negative emotions or even black magic.  
 
Oṁ Hrīṁ Krīṁ Huṁ Shrīṁ 
 
These are the four great Goddess mantras that govern the prime forms of energy as magnetic force, electrical force, heat, 
and delight. These f our mantras can be used together with OM to get an extremely powerful mantra which can bring 
about an integral development of body, mind and soul in harmony with the Divine or Inner Self.  
 
Rāṁ 
 
Ram (rarm) is the best mantra for drawing down the protective light and grace of the Divine. It gives strength, calm, 
rest and peace and is particularly good for high Vata and mental disorders.  
 
Aīṁ 
 
This is the best mantra for the mind. It helps improve concen tration, rational thinking and speech in general. It is 
very helpful when there are mental and nervous disorders.  
 
Klīṁ 
 
Klim (kleem) gives strength, sexual vitality and control of our emotional nature . 
 
Shaṁ 
 
Sham (a -sound as in shut) is a mantra for Saturn used is generally used for promoting peace, calm, de tachment and con -
tentment. It is good for mental and nervous disorders.  
 
Ya  - Ra – La – Vaṁ: Seed -sounds of the first four chakras . 
 136 Healing sounds  
 
Daily repetition of these sounds can have profound remedial, balancing and harmonising effects on the part o f  t h e  b o d y  
indicated.  Take a deep breath and make each sound while exhaling.  The sound should be held for as long as is 
comfortable and may be repeated three to ten times (some sounds like ‘nnn’ and ‘ma’ also can be repeated in staccato 
fashion).  Place your awareness both on the sounds and the sensation in the body where they appear to resonate.  
 
Balance the whole body:       A          E         I         O         U  
  
Lungs, chest:        Humm  Humm  Humm  Humm  
 
Sinuses:         Mmmm Mmmm Mmmm Mmmm  
 
Ears:         Nnnn  Nnnn  Nnnn  Nnnn   
 
Eyes:         Immm  Immm  Immm  Immm  
 
Nose:         Lmmm  Lmmm  Lmmm  Lmmm  
  
Stomach:        Paam  Paam  Paam  Paam  
 
Reproductive organs:       Mam  Mam  Mam  Mam  
 
Stomach, digestion system:      Huh  Huh  Huh  Huh  
 
Diaphragm:        Ha Ha Ha Ha 
 
Lungs, large intestines:       Ssss Ssss Ssss Ssss 
 
Liver, small intestine:       Shhh  Shhh  Shhh  Shhh  
 
Spleen, gall bladder:       Who  Who  Who  Who  
 
Kidneys, bladder:        Hoo Hoo Hoo Hoo 
 
Heart:         Ma Ma Ma Ma 
 
Throat:         Kaa Gaa Gha 
 
Migraines & heada ches:       Yaa Yu Yai 
 
Heart, throat:        So Hum      So Hum       So Hum  
  
Respiration, stomach:       Chi Uh Huh              Chi Uh Hah  
 
Chakras:         Lam   Vam   Ram  Yam  Ham  Sham  Om  
 
 
 
 
 137 Additional mantra information  
 
 
LAKSHMI MANTRA  
Om Gum Shri m Maha Lakshmiyei Swaha  
Let all obstacles to my abundance be eliminated and the flow of the shakti of abundance released within me  
 
This mantra is used to remove karmic obstacles related to abundance and to the attraction of finances or prosperity.  
Om: seed sound for the sixth (Ajna) chakra or "third eye" (located in the centre  of the forehead, about a half -inch above the line of the 
eyebrows, some times referred to as the mystic "third ey e"). From here, the principle of mind directs all that follows in the  r e s t  o f  t h e  
mantra.  
Gum: s e e d  s o u n d  f o r  G a n a p a t i ,  a  f o r m  o f  G a n e s h a ,  t h e  H i n d u  G o d  k n o w n  a s  t h e  r e m o v e r  o f  o b s t a c l e s ,  w h o  i s  o f t e n  p o r trayed in the 
form of an elephant.  
Shrim: seed sound  for Lakshmi and refers to abundance of all kinds.  
Maha : a salutatio n that means both "great" and "heart -ce n t er ed "  
Lakshmi:  t h e  f e m i n i n e  p r i n c i p l e .  
Yei: a shakti -activating sound.  
Swaha: a traditional ending of mantras, where its meaning is "I salute and by so doing I automatically invoke her power:'  
 
 
KUBERA MANTRA  
(the c elestial guardian of riches ) 
Ha Sa Ka La E I La Hrim  
Ha Sa Ka La E I La Hrim  
 
There is no translation possible of this mantra, since it is composed solely of seed syllables.  
 
This mantra is used to attain great wealth that once achieved  will be self -su stai n i n g .  T h i s  i s  p a r t i c u l a r l y  t r u e  i f  y o u  a r e  i n  a n  
o c cu p a t ion  wh er e y ou  s af eg u ar d  m on ey  o r i n v es tm en ts  for  oth er s.  Kubera is of t en  r ef er red  to  a s th e  c e l es t i al  wh o i s  t h e  D iv i n e 
Treasurer. So if you are an investment counsellor, stock broker, real estate bro ker, or work in some similar capacity, this mantra will 
g r e a t l y  a i d  i n  t h e  d i s c h a r g i n g  o f  y o u r  f i n a n c i a l  r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s  w h i l e  a l s o  p r o v i d i n g  y o u  w i t h  a b u n d a n c e .  
Ha Sa : bring energy to the Ajna chakra.  
Ka La :  b r i n g s  t h e  e n e r g y  o f  t h e  A j n a  c h a k r a  i n t o  c o n n ection with the Kala (Ka La )  c h a k r a ,  l i t e r a l l y  t h e  w h e e l  o f  t i m e ,  l o c a t e d  i n  t h e  
upper chest between the heart centre and the throat centre.  
E: (pronounced e -e-e-e) sends energy from the medulla oblongata ( l o c a t e d  a t  t h e  b a s e  o f  t h e  s k u l l )  d o w n  t h e  b a c k  s i de of the spine to 
the Muladhara (first) chakra, at the base of the spine.  
I: this is really the sounds Ah and E. Ah resounds in the upper chest, and E works again as discussed earlier.  
La:  t h e  s e e d  s o u n d  o f  t h e  f i r s t  c h a k r a  (Lam) with the m left off. This  means that the sound La is voiced, but the vibration is just short 
o f  a c t u a l  a n c h o r i n g  o n  t h e  E a r t h  P l a n e  s i n c e  i t  i s  t h e  v o i c e d  m on the end of any seed sound that would anchor it here on the Earth 
Plane.  
Hrim : the seed sound of the esoteric Hrit Padma (also called the Hridayam in some texts) located two fingers below the Anahata c h a k r a ,  
which corresponds to the heart centre in the physical body.  
 
 
A SHIVA MANTRA  
(for fulfilment of desires)  
Om Sarva Kamadaya Namaha  
Salutations to the granter of desires.  
 
This mantra is used to petition the Great Consciousness to fulfil our individual desires. Every desire is tied to our conscio usness and 
this mantra attracts the elements of universal consciousness that fulfil desires strongly held by the mind.  
T h i s  i s  a  S h i v a  m a n t r a  b e c a u s e  i t  i s  a d d r e s s e d  t o  S h a k t i ,  o r  t h e  p r i m a l  e n e r g y  o f  S h i v a  t h a t  r i s e s  o u t  o f  t h e  w e l l s p r i n g  o f  c o m p a s s i o n ,  
and thus is automatically part of sentient self -consciousness existing everywhere in the universe.  
 
Sarva c a n  m e a n  " s o u r c e  o f . "  U s e d  h e r e ,  t h e  i m p l i c a t i o n  i s  t h a t  d e s i r e s  a r e  p a r t  o f  t h e  n a t u r e  o f  u n i v e r s a l  c o n s c i o u s n e s s  a n d  n a t u r a l l y  
arise in individual consciousness. In fact, the tales and parables concerning Shiva invariably show him absorbed in contempla ting his 
o w n  n a t u r e ,  j u s t  a s  w e  a r e  c o m p l e t e l y  c o n s u m e d  w i t h  t h e  d e t a i l s  o f  o u r  o w n  l i v e s .  O n l y  w h e n  o n e  m e r g e s  i n t o  u n i v e r s a l  t r u t h  s o  
completely that individual existence ceases altogether does desire , in our normal understanding of the word , cease.  
Om: The seed sound for the sixth  (Ajna) chakra, from which the principle of mind directs all that follows.  
Sarva: source of.  
Kamadaya: that which grants fulfilment of desires.  
Namaha: I invoke by saluting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 138  
 
 
DHANVANTRE MANTRA  
Om Shri Dhanvantre Namaha  
This mantra is used to find th e best resolution for a medical problem  
 
O n e  o f  t h e  t a s k s  w e  a l l  f a c e  w h e n  a  h e a l t h  p r o b l e m  a r i s e s  i s  f i n d i n g  a n  a p p r o p r i a t e  p h y s i c i a n  o r  p r a c t i t i o n e r  f o r  o u r  p r o b l e m  among 
so many choices. In Hinduism, the celestial healer or physician is known as D h a n v a n tre, and his mantra is chanted when one is 
looking for guidance to find the most appropriate path to healing.  
O m : the seed sound for the sixth (Ajna) chakra, from which the principle of mind directs all that follows.  
Shri: invoking the power of Lakshmi, th e transcendental power of manifestation.  
Dhanvantre :   the celestial healer.  
N a m a h a : I  invoke by saluting.  
 
 
GAYATRI MANTRA  
Om Bhu, Bhuvaha, Swaha  
Tat Savitur Varenyam  
Bhargo Devasya Dhimahi  
Dhiyo Yonaha Prachodayat  
 
O Self -E f f u l g e n t  L i g h t  t h a t  h a s  g i v e n  b i rt h  t o all  t h e l o k as  s p h er es  of c on sc i ou sn e s s, w ho  i s w o rt h y of  w o rs hi p  an d  a p p e ar s t hr ou g h th e o rbi t of 
the Sun, illumine our intellect.  
 
 
The Gayatri Mantra  is a gift to the world  from  the great rishi Vishvamitra , the se er of the third book of the Rig Ve da. It helps  carry solar 
light , energy and  power to our minds and bodies and is the best mantra for awa kening the higher mind or soul.  
T h i s  m a n t r a  i s  u s e d  t o  i l l u m i n a t e  o u r  i n t e l l e c t .  S a y i n g  t h i s  m a n t r a  a u t o m a t i c a l l y  s u p p o r t s  d h a r m a  i n  t h e  w o r l d  a s  w e l l  a s  your 
individual swadharma, a  w o r d  t h a t  r e f e r s  t o  t h e  l a w  o f  y o u r  o w n  b e i n g  o r  n a t u r e .  A s  t h i s  m a n t r a  i s  c h a n t e d  o v e r  t i m e ,  s p i r i t u a l  l i g h t  
i s  d r a w n  i n t o  e a c h  c h a k r a ,  s t a r t i n g  a t  t h e  b a s e  o f  t h e  s p i n e .  C o r r e s p o n d i n g l y ,  o u r  a b i l i t y  t o  c o m p r e h e n d  t h e  e s s e n c e  of each of the 
r e a l m s  g r o w s .  I n  m e d i t a t i o n ,  t r a v e l  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s  t o  t h e  h i g h e r  r e a l m s  b e c o m e s  p o s s i b l e  a s  n e w  f a c u l t i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s  grow 
from our practice. The Gayatri Mantra is a universe in miniature through the power of sound.  It appears in the  Rig Veda in a form of 
twenty -f o u r  S a n s k r i t  s y l l a b l e s .  F o r  t h i s  r e a s o n ,  i t  i s  w i d e l y  p r a c t i c e d  i n  I n d i a  i n  t h i s  f o r m .  It i s  s a i d  t o  c o n t a i n  a l l  p o w e r s  o f  a l l  
m a n t r a s ,  a n d  i s  a l s o  k n o w n  a s  t h e  s o u r c e  o f  a l l  k n o w l e d g e  a n d  t h e  " M o t h e r  o f  t h e  V e d a s , "  b u t  i t s  p rimary applica tion  is  f or 
illumination of the intellect. An illumined intellect can contain immeasur able knowledge, including a complete understanding of 
what we call "power:" Those who have attained the full fruit of this mantra are in the company of th e highest beings in the universe.  
Om Bhur: Om and Salutations to the Earth Plane (Ist chakra).  
B h u v a h a :  salutations to the Atmospheric Plane (2nd chakra).  
S w a b a :  salutations to the Solar Region (3rd chakra).  
Tat Savitur Yarenyam: salutations to that realm which is beyond human comprehension.  
B b a r g o  D e v a s y a  D b i m a b i :  in that place where all the celestials of all the spheres have ...  
D h i y o  Y o n a b a  P r a c b o d a y a t :  received enlightenment, kindly enlighten our intellect.  
 
 
 
GREAT MANI MANTRA  
Om Mani Padme Hum  
The Jew el of consciousness has reached the heart's Lotus.  
 
U s e  t h i s  m a n t r a  t o  u n i t e  h e a r t  a n d  m i n d .  T h e  c i r c u l a t i o n  o f  e n e r g y  t h r o u g h  t h e  c e n t r e s  l i s t e d  b e l o w  b u i l d s  l i n k s  a m o n g  m i n d ,  will, 
and heart. There is a saying in the East, "When the light of the heart is  united with power of the mind, anything is possible:"  
The Great Mani Mantra is the most often chanted mantra in the world. Pulling energy from the lower chakras into the upper one s, it 
activates these centres and circulates energy around them, magnetizing  t h e  u p p e r  s p i n e  s o  t h a t  t h e  e n e r g y  i n  t h e  s u b t l e  b o d y  
becomes centered in the upper part of the body. The heart and mental chakras become predominant, leading to the ability to ex ist as 
a  c o n s c i o u s  e n t i t y  w i t h o u t  a  p h y s i c a l  b o d y .  A s  w i t h  t h e  G a y a t r i  M a n t r a, when this mantra is chanted by anyone, all of humanity is 
b en ef i ted .  
Om: activates the Ajna chakra between the eyebrows.  
Mani: sends energy to the Manas chakra in the back of the head.  
Padme:  in this context, Padme sends energy to the Anahata chakra at the heart.  
Hum:  a seed sound that activates the Vishuddha chakra at the throat.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 139  
 
 
DATTATREYA MANTRA  
O m  D r a m  O m  G u r u  D a t t a y a  N a m a h a  
Salutations to the Eternal Enlightener of souls.  
 
Use this mantra to sharpen your skills as a spiritual counsellor an d teacher, as well as moving your personal dharma forward. This 
mantra invokes Dattatreya’s  energy into your life and activities.  
The ancient spiritual being Dattatreya, who transmitted spiritual knowledge and elimi n a t e d  k a r m a  f o r  s o m e  o f  h i s  s t u d e n t s ,  i s  the first 
known guru in the specific application of the word. There were sages (rishis) and beings of great knowledge and power (Maha Siddhas) 
who often acted in the role of teacher or spiritual benefactor to students, but Dattatreya was the first recorde d being whose primary job 
w a s  t h e  l e a d i n g  o f  s o u l s  b a c k  t o  t h e i r  h i g h e s t  d i v i n i t y .  T h e  s y l l a b l e s  G u  a n d  R u  r e f e r  t o  t h a t  w h i c h  d i s p e l s  t h e  d a r k n e s s  o f  ignorance, 
l e a d i n g  t o  t h e  r e l e a s e  o f  t h e  a c t u a l  s p i r i t u a l  l i g h t  w i t h i n .  T h e  n i m b u s  o r  h a l o  o f  t h e  s a i n t s  a n d  s a g e s  i s  a  w e l l -known manifestation of 
this light.  
Om: the seed sound activating the Ajna chakra at the brow centre.  
D r a m :  the seed sound for the Guru Principle manifesting in a form, usually meaning a physical body.  
Guru:  the transcendental principle  o f  e n l i g h t e n m e n t ,  s p i r i t u a l  i n s t r u c t i o n ,  a n d  G r a c e  o f  G o d  t h a t  c a n  m a n i f e s t  a t  a n y  t i m e ,  a n y  p l a c e ,  
through any thing or entity, physi cal or non -p h y s i c a l .  T h e  o p e r a t i o n  o f  t h i s  i s  a  t r u e  s p i r i t u a l  m y s t e r y ,  a n d  t h e r e  a r e  n o  l i m i t s  p l a c e d  
upon how this pri nciple may manifest.  
Dattaya: refers to and invokes the presence of that entity who exists, but without a physical body, who is the primal and first indivi dual 
guru whose sole purpose was the redemption of souls.  
N a m a ha :  the energy of salutation that autom atically invokes that which precedes it.  
 
 
VASUDEVA MANTRA  
O m  N a m o  B h a g a v a t e  V a s u d e v a y a  
Om is the name of the In -d w e l l e r  w h o  i s  i n  c o n s t a n t  c o n t a c t  w i t h  a l l  o f  c r e a t i o n .  S a l u t a t i o n s .  
 
U s e  t h i s  m a n t r a  t o  o b t a i n  s p i r i t u a l  f r e e d o m .  T h e  e s s e n c e  o f  t h e  D i v i n e  i s  ev ery w h e r e ,  b u t  w e  i d e n t i f y  w i t h  o u r  i n d i v i d u a l  e g o -
c e n t e r e d  e x i s t e n c e .  T h i s  m a n t r a  b u i l d s  a  l i n k  b e t w e e n  c o n s c i o u s  d i v i n i t y  a t  e v e r y  l e v e l  o f  c r e a t i o n  a n d  o u r  o w n  e g o -based 
c on s ci ou sn es s.  E v en tu a l ly ,  ou r s en se of  i d en t i ty  ch an g es t o in c lud e a l l  l if e,  e ven as we know we are living in an individual body.  
The Sanskrit term Vasu deva means "the In -d w e l l e r "  r e f e r r i n g  t o  t h e  s o u l  o r  a t m a n .  S i n c e  t h e  s o u l  i s  a l w a y s  d i v i n e  a n d  a  p a r t  o f  G o d  
everywhere, the Vasudeva Mantra, at an advanced level, can be a vehicle for uniting with divinity anywhere in the cosmos.  
T h e  m e c h a n i c s  o f  t h e  m a n t r a  a r e  s i m p l e :  W h e n  t h e  t w e l v e  s y l l a b l e s  a r e  c h a n t e d ,  e n e r g y  i s  r o t a t e d  a r o u n d  t h e  s p i n e ,  s t i m u l a t i n g the 
p os i t i ve  an d  n eg at i v e po l es  o f  th e  ch ak r a s.  T h e  en erg y  f i rs t g oe s  d ow n  th e spine, then back up. After the mantra is chanted many 
t h o u s a n d s  o f  t i m e s ,  e n e r g y  i s  r o t a t e d  a r o u n d  t h e  s p i n e  t o  s u c h  a n  e x t e n t  t h a t  i t  b e c o m e s  s p i r i t u a l l y  m a g n e t i z e d .  T h i s  a l l o w s  for 
h i g h e r  v i b r a t i o n s  a n d  o c t a v e s  o f  s p i r i t u a l  e n e r g y  t o  b e  i n v o k e d  a n d  h e l d  i n  t h e  s u b t l e  b o d y .  F i n a l l y ,  t h e  s u b t l e  b o d y  b e c o m e s  s o  
energy -based that it can ultimately survive without its physi cal counterpart.  
O m :  the seed sound for the sixth (Ajna) chakra, from which the principle of mind directs all that follows.  
N a m o :  here mea ns "name of."  
B b a g a v a t e :  o u r ow n  com p le te ly  in t eg ra t ed  d i v in e se l f t h at  w e a re in  t h e p ro c ess  of becoming.  
V a s u d e v a y a :  the in -dwelling divinity that you are entreating to permeate your mind, personality, ego, and being.  
 
 
TARAKA RAMA MANTRA  
O m  S r i  R a m a  J a y  R a m a  J a y a  J a y a  R a m a  
Om and victory to Rama and Sita, victory to Rama again and again.  
 
U s e  t h i s  m a n t r a  t o  b e g i n  t h e  p r o c e s s  o f  p u r i f i c a t i o n  o f  t h e  e g o  a n d  p e r s o n a l i t y  t h a t  w i l l  e v e n t u a l l y  l e a d  t o  s p i r i t u a l  f r e e d o m. In this 
mantra, Rama is the divine self within . All difficulties and problems, i n c l u d ing eradication of karma itself, can be solved if we allow 
the divinity within to handle e verything. This is the "victory" of the self within that is indicated in the translation.  
Om: the seed sound for the sixt h (Ajna) chakra, from which the principle of mind directs all that follows.  
Sri: r ef er s t o th e a l l -powerful energy of Sita.  Jaya: victory.  
Rama:  the syllables Ra and Ma balance energy in the masculine and feminine chan nels in the body, located on the righ t and left sides 
of the body, respectively. As Rama, it also refers to the avatar himself, as well as to the divine self within.  
Taraka m e a n s  t h a t  w h i c h  " t a k e s  o n e  a c r o s s : "  I n  t h i s  c a s e ,  t h e  " a c r o s s "  r e f e r s  t o  t h e  o c e a n  o f  r e b i r t h ,  t h i s  samsara that keeps us coming 
back again and again to assume bodies and burn off, as well as accumulate, karma. This mantra, practiced by Mahatma Gandhi fr om 
t h e  t i m e  h e  w a s  a  y o u n g  b o y ,  w i l l  f r e e  o n e  f r o m  t h e  r o u n d  o f  r e b i r t h .  G a n d h i  w a s  h e a r d  t o  s a y  " H e y  R a m "  a t  t h e  t i m e  o f  his death, 
when he was pierced by an assassin's bullet. In The Ramayana, t h e  e p i c  s t o r y  o f  t h e  l i f e  o f  S i t a  a n d  R a m a  ( t h e  s e v e n t h  A v a t a r  o f  
V i s h n u ) ,  t h i s  a n d  o t h e r  m a n t r a s  p e r t a i n i n g  t o  S i t a  a n d  R a m a  a r e  g i v e n .  H o w e v e r ,  t h i s  p a r t i c u l a r  m a n t r a  i s  u n i f o r m l y  recommended 
for transcending karma.  
 140 Overtoning  
 
 
 
This chanting technique requires no singing skills whatsoever and can easily be accomplished by anyone with a little 
practice.  It is practiced by Tibetan monks to achieve higher states of consciousness b ut is also a very pleasant way to 
quickly re -balance the mind and effectively remove stress and tension from the body.  It i s  v e r y  effective for improving 
hearing and increasing alertness.  
 
Overtoning produces harmonics or pure notes and their flute -like s ounds ethereally hover above the base tone or drone.  
The deep, resonant sound is produced by making a deep ‘ooooo’ sound in the back of the throat and then altering the 
position of the tongue and shape of the mouth to produce variations of that sound.  Th e tongue is curled up and bends 
back towards the roof of the mouth and is then gradually moved forward.  The resonance is amplified by pursing the 
lips, flattening the cheeks (the mouth slightly open) and allowing air to flow between the tip of the tongue and the roof 
of the mouth; the mouth being the hollow resonating chamber.  A deep sound is produced with the tip of the tongue near 
the back of the mouth and a higher sound with the tip of the tongue towards the front of the mouth, just behind the 
upper te eth.  By slowly saying a long, drawn -out ‘onre’ as the tongue gradually unfurls towards the front teeth , t h e 
correct sound is produced.  The deeper ‘ooo’ or ‘uuu’ vowel sounds are produced when the tongue is near the epiglottis 
and the higher ‘iii’ and ‘ee e’ vowel sounds are produced when the tongue is near the upper front teeth.  
 
If the tongue touches the roof of the mouth and air isn’t able to pass over it the sound stops resonating and becomes flat. 
As you become familiar with the technique you can exper iment with altering the shape of the mouth, as well as the 
tongue, to produce a clearer, more rounded, resonating note.  
 
Try experimenting by imitating the noise of a model aeroplane as it twists and turns above you or a racing car hurtling 
round a racetra ck.  If you’re not familiar with this sound ask any eight year old to demonstrat e – they’re usually pretty 
good!   This isn’t ‘over -toning’ as it varies in pitch but its practice involves similar mouth movements.  The harmonics a 
Tibetan singing bowl produc es when struck are overtones of a single note , a n d  a s  o n e  l i s t e n s  m o r e  c l o s e l y  m o r e  
overtones are often ‘picked up’.  
 
As you continue practicing overtoning, harmonics will certainly be produced, though they are often difficult to pick up 
yourself until you r ears becomes ‘tuned -in’ to them.  Other people can often hear them before you do but if you practice 
in a good resonating chamber , that echoes the sounds around , you’ll notice them much more quickly.  Large, empty 
rooms, bathroom sinks, tunnels, bridges and churches work especially well.  Cupping your hands behind your ears also 
helps and practicing with other people can produce quite phenomenal sounds, especially if the room you’re in is very 
resonant.  
 
As you begin to hear the harmonics appearing above or alongside the basic tone/drone you’ll begin to sensitise the 
hearing process and begin to find interesting, captivating sounds in the most unusual places and from the most 
unexpected sources.  The sound of a washing machine or train can suddenly become an enthralling and tantalising 
experience to the ear that’s ‘tuned in’ to their harmonics.  As you begin to explore this new realm of sound you may 
find that you aren’t tone deaf and can sing a few notes and keep in tune after all.  
 
You will most likely fi nd that as you progress ,your breathing improves, your voice becomes clearer and more resonant, 
and notes that you sing become sharper and more ‘bell -like’.  
 141 Chapter 8 
Recipes  
~ Ayurvedic fare for health & well -being  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Everyone should be his o w n phy sician.   We ought to assist and not force nature.  
Eat with moderation and with what agrees with your constitution.  
Nothing is good for the body but what we can digest . 
What medicine can produce digestion?   Exercise  
What will recruit strength?   Sleep  
What will alleviate in -curable ills?   Patience  
~ Voltaire  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 142 Dhal  soup or s auce  
(Red Lentils or Split Yellow Mung Beans)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soak the lentils for six hours and then p lace in sieve and wash under a cold tap until the wa t er  runs clear.  Place in a large 
pan and add 1 litre of water.  Bring to the boil for 15  minutes ; add more water if the lentils are drying out . Turn the heat off 
and leave for one hour with a lid on.  Now w hisk the lentils until they form a creamy texture like scrambled eggs.  Fry the 
spices for two minutes in 2 tsp ghee and then add to the lentils . Add salt/pepper just before serving (seaweed may be using 
instead of salt)  
 
Variations  
 
Kicharee : Soak ½ cup  Basmati rice with ½ cup lentils overnight  (replaces 1 cup lentils)  
Spicy dhal:  Add cumin seeds (1½ tsp), coriander seeds (½ tsp)  Turmeric  (½ tsp)  cardamom seeds (½ tsp) . 
Mint dh al: Add Pitta churna (1 tsp), dried mint (1 tsp) after whisking the lentils . 
Carrot dhal:  Add grated carrot (2 cups) and 2 tsp chopped coriander  during cooking . 
Carrot dhal II:  Before serving add ½ cup of fennel juice, ½ cup of carrot juice and 2 tsp chopped coriander . 
Fennel dhal:  Add grated fennel (1 cup) half way through cooking process.  
Vegetable dhal:  Add mixed veg (three types - chopped small) half way thro ugh cooking process.  
Herb dhal:  Add fresh herbs: basil (1 tsp), sage (1 tsp) or tarragon (1 tsp) half way through cooking process.  
Herb dhal II:  Add grated carrot (1 cup), sage (½ tsp), th yme (½ tsp), oregano (½ tsp) during cooking.  
Coconut dhal:  Befor e se rving  add coconut milk (200ml) or creamed coconut and nutmeg (pinch).  
Spinach dhal:  Before serving  add coconut milk (200ml) or creamed coconut and chopped spinach (2 cup).  
Coriander dhal : Before serving add coconut milk (100ml) or creamed coconut and fresh  coriander (1 cup) . 
Celery dhal:  Before serving add some freshly chopped coriander and a ½ cup fennel or celery juice.  
Lemon dhal:  Before serving add the juice of ½ lemon and 2 tbsp chopped parsley.  
Juice dhal:  Before serving add one cup of fresh juice (ca rrot, fennel, celery).  
 
Mung b eans  are sweet and astringent in initial taste, sweet in post digestive effect, energetically cooling and balancing to 
all three doshas. They are easily digested, particularly good for pitta types and excellent during the summ er to combat 
heat. They are light on the digestion and calm and balance the mind (sattvic). They are refrigerant, antipyretic, alterative 
and haemostatic. They are good for febrile diseases, lung, liver, spleen and bleeding disorders, cancer, fever, heat s troke 
and alcohol detoxification. A plaster or poultice can be made from mung bean flour to draw toxins from the body and for 
treating burns, sores, inflamed or swollen joints, swollen breast, mastitis and breast cancer.  
 
Basmati r ice is sweet, both in in itial taste and post -digestive effect, energetically neutral and balancing to all three 
doshas. It is easy to digest, a tonic for the body, soothing to the mucus membranes (demulcent) and nutritive (helps build 
the tissues) and mildly laxative. It is not c logging and very sattvic (clarifies and calms the mind). It is high in B -complex 
vitamins and generally well tolerated food in conditions of anorexia, poor digestion and vomiting. It is detoxifying and an 
excellent convalescence food; it is also good for b reaking a fast. Kicharee, a combination of basmati rise and split mung 
beans, is an excellent staple diet for maintaining good health and in treating many diseases. However, bleached, refined 
rice is sticky and can increase kapha and ama in the body. Whils t brown rise is higher in nutritional status because it does 
not have the hull, bran and germ polished off, it is more perishable and much harder to digest. Therefore, Ayurveda sees 
white basmati rice as the preferred grain as its nutrients are more easily  available and better assimilated by the tissues.  
       Prep time: 20 minutes         Cooking time: 1 hour     Servings: 4  
      1 cup yellow mung dhal      2 tsp ginger (grated )       2 tsp ghe e 
      ¼ tsp hin g                           2 tsp Vata churn a            Pinch of salt  
 
 143 Sauces  
 
Red pepper s auce I   
1 red pepper - diced  
1 courgette - diced  
2 carrots - juiced  
1 tsp thyme  
1 tsp oregano  ½ tsp basil  
1 tsp salt  
¼ pepper  
6 cups water  
1 cup soya milk
 
Bring everything (except mi lk & carrot juice) to boil and simmer for 30 minutes.  Blend thoroughly and then add 
soya milk and juice.  
 
Red pepper sauce II 
 
1 red pepper - chopped  
1 cup soya milk or coconut milk  1 tsp nutmeg  
 
Put pepper and nutmeg in a saucepan and cover with boilin g water.  Simmer until liquid has reduced to half.  
Place in liquidizer with the soya milk and blend until smooth.  One cup of cooked red lentils may also be added 
if desired.  
 
Watercress sauce  
 
75 g watercress – washed thoroughly  
1 cup cooked red lentils  
1 ltr boiling water  1 tbsp coconut milk  
Salt/pepper (opt)  
 
To the cooked lentils add the boiling water, bring to boil and add watercress. Simmer for 10 mins. and then 
liquidize with the coconut milk. Add salt/pepper to taste.  
 
Pesto sauce  
 
2 tsp ghee or  olive oil  
1 cup fresh tarragon/basil  
1 tbsp fresh parsley  I tbsp pumpkin seeds - ground  
¼ tsp hing (or 1 clove garlic if not on PK diet)
 
Blend all the ingredients until smooth.  Serve with pasta or add I tbsp Udo’s oil and use as a salad dressing.  
 
Aspar agus sauce  
 
½ courgette - chopped  
1 cup asparagus ends - chopped  
½ cup coriander or basil  Salt/pepper to taste (add before serving)  
I bay leaf  
½ cup cooked lentils
 
Bring to boil and simmer until soft (except lentils).  Remove bay leaf and add lentils.  B lend until smooth.  
 
Coriander sauce  
 
1 cup fresh coriander  
1 cup fresh basil  
1 tsp fresh ginger - grated  4 asparagus spears – chopped/steamed  
1 cup warm soya milk  
Salt/pepper (opt)
 
Blend in a liquidizer until smooth and then add hot water if a more liqui d sauce is desired.  
 
Basil sauce  
 
1 ½ cup fresh basil  
1 cup fresh parsley  
2 M courgettes – chopped small  
1 broccoli floret  
1 tsp fresh ginger  1 tsp vata churna  
1 tsp ghee  
3 cups hot water  
1 cup warm soya or coconut milk
 
Melt the ghee and add ginger and v ata churna.  Fry for ½ min and then add vegetables and 1C hot water.  Bring 
to boil and simmer until liquid has been absorbed.  Add parsley, basil and 2 cups hot water and bring to boil and 
simmer until liquid has halved.  Blend with the milk in a liquidiz er until smooth.  
 144 Churnas  
(spice mixtures)  
 
 
Vata  
 
2 tsp cardamom  
1 tsp cumin  
1 tsp ginger  
½ tsp cinnamon  ½ tsp nutmeg  
Pinch hing  
Pinch salt (opt)  
 
 
Pitta 
 
2 tsp coriander  
2 tsp fennel  
1 tsp cumin  
1 tsp cardamom  
½ tsp ginger  ½ tsp turmeric  
¼ tsp cinnamo n 
¼ tsp stevia  
Pinch salt  
 
 
Kapha  
 
2 tsp ginger  
1 tsp black pepper  
1 tsp coriander  ½ tsp turmeric  
¼ tsp cinnamon  
Pinch salt  
 
 
Chinese spice mix  
 
1 tsp grated ginger  
¼ tsp nutmeg  
½ tsp cinnamon  
½ tsp caraway seeds  Pinch black pepper  
Pinch hing (asafoet ida) 
Dash of lemon or lime  
 
 
Indian curry mix 
 
1 tsp cumin  
1 tsp cardamom  
1 tsp turmeric  1 tsp coriander  
Pinch hing (asafoetida)  
Salt/pepper (opt)
 
 
Korma mix  
 
2 tsp ground coconut  
1 tsp ground almonds  
1 tsp coriander  
1 tsp ginger  
1 tsp cumin  ¼ tsp nutm eg 
¼ tsp paprika  
¼ tsp clove  
¼ tsp cinnamon  
Pinch hing (asafoetida)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 145 Chutneys  
 
 
Mint chutney  
 
1 cup fresh mint leaves  
2 tbsp grated coconut  
1 tbsp sesame seeds (opt)  
1 tbsp lemon juice  1 tbsp grated fresh ginger  
1 tsp honey  
¼ cup water  
 
Place in a blender and blend until smooth.  
 
Fruit chutney  
 
½ cup fresh pineapple  
1 apple  
¼ cup raisins  
¼ cup dates  ¼ cup apricots  
½ cup fresh coriander  
¼ tsp turmeric  
¼ tsp cayenne pepper  
 
Chop the pineapple, apricots, dates and coriander. Place in a small pan and  add the other ingredients. Cover with 
boiling water and simmer until almost all the liquid has gone.  
For spicier chutney add 2 tsp kapha churna.  
 
Kapha chutney  
 
½ red pepper  
1 tsp fresh ginger – grated  
1 tsp kapha churna  Pinch hing or jerk  
½ tsp honey (o pt) 
1 tsp pumpkin seeds - ground
 
Simmer pepper, ginger, churna and hing in 1 cup hot water until liquid has gone.  Allow to cool and then add 
pumpkin seeds and honey.  
 
Fig & pear chutney  
 
6 dried figs – chopped  
3 pears - chopped  
¼ cup raisins  1 tbsp cori ander - fr esh  
1- 2 fresh apricots - chopped  
1 tsp Kapha churna  
 
Place all the ingredients in a small pan and cover with boiling water. Simmer until all the liquid has gone.  
 
Date & pear chutney  
 
4 pears (dried) - chopped  
8 dates  
½ tsp paprika  1 tsp pars l e y  - dried  
¼ tsp ginger - ground  
½ tsp French mustard  
 
Place all the ingredients in a small pan and cover with boiling water. Simmer until all the liquid has gone.  
 
Fresh green chutney  
 
1 cup parsley/coriander - chopped  
Juice of 1 lemon  
¼ tsp cayenne pe pper ¼ cup almonds - flaked  
¼ cup water  
Salt to taste  
 
Place in a blender and blend on a low speed until smooth.  
 
 146 Dips  
 
 
 
Avocado dip 
 
1 avocado  
1 S tomato  
2 tsp lemon juice  ¼ tsp hing  
Pinch salt/pepper  
 
Place all the ingredients in a small bowl and mas h thoroughly.  
 
Soya bean dip  
 
2 cups soya beans – soaked overnight  
Pinch hing  
2 tsp chives  1 tbsp Udo’s oil  
½ tsp salt/pepper (or cayenne pepper)  
1 cup water & 2 tsp lemon juice  
 
Cook beans for approx. 1½ hrs and then liquidise all the ingredients until smooth.  
  
Cashew dip 
 
¼ Avocado  
S ginger piece – finely grated  
1 tsp lemon juice  
⅓ cup cashew nuts  - ground  1 tsp Udo’s oil  
Hing - pinch  
Salt/pepper  (opt.)
 
Add all the other ingredients together and then blend until smooth.  
 
Almond & avocado dip  
 
¼  avocado  
2 tsp almonds – ground  
2 tsp mint - chopped  
2 tsp lemon juice  1 tsp Udo’s o il 
Hing - pinch  
Salt/pepper – to taste  
 
Add the ingredients together and blend until smooth.  Add more oil if needed.  
 
Pine nut dip  
 
½ cup pine nuts  
½ cup almonds - ground  
1 tbsp pumpkin oil  1 tbsp yoghurt  
Salt/pepper to taste  
 
Add the ingredients toget her and blend until smooth.  
 
Parsley dip 
 
I tbsp ground pine nuts  
1 tsp dried parsley or 1 tbsp fresh parsley  
½ tsp cider vinegar  
½ tsp honey (opt)  2 tbsp Udo’s oil  
Hing - pinch  
I tbsp full cream (opt. Not on PK)  
I tbsp cold water  
 
Add the ingredients to gether and blend until smooth.  
 
 
 147 Dressings  
(flax, pumpkin or hemp oil may be used instead of Udo’s oil)  
 
 
Instructions: For the recipes below place ingredients in a blender and blend until thoroughly mixed.  
 
 
Basil & orange dressing  
 
1 tbsp Udo’s Oil  
1 tsp honey  
1 tsp basil – f r e s h  Black pepper - pinch  
1 tsp English mustard  
2 tsp orange juice - freshly squeezed  
 
 
 
Mint dressing  
 
1 tbsp Udo’s oil  
1 tsp honey  
2 tsp mint – fresh  2 tsp Balsamic vinegar  
1 tsp English mustard  
2 tsp yoghurt  
 
 
 
Tarragon dressing  
 
2 tbsp Udo’s oil  
1 tsp honey  
2 tsp tarragon – f r e s h  2 tsp Balsamic vinegar  
½ - 1 tsp mustard – whole grain  
 
 
 
Tomato & mint dressing  
 
1 tbsp Udo’s Oil  
1 S tomato  ½ tsp English mustard  
I tbsp mint leaves - chopped  
 
 
 
Ginger & basil dressing  
 
3 tbsp U do’s oil  
2 tsp honey  
1 tsp ginger - fresh  
3 tbsp basil – fresh  
1 tsp lemon juice - fresh  ½ tsp Balsamic vinegar  
1 tsp cider vinegar  
¼ tsp Dried mustard  
1 tsp almond – ground (opt.)  
 
 
 
Parsley & pumpkin dressing  
 
4 tbsp Pumpkin or Udo’s oil  
¼ cup pumpkin seeds - ground  
1 tsp honey  
1 cup parsley – fresh, chopped  2 tsp cider vinegar  
2 tbsp water  
1-2 tbsp lemon juice - fr esh  
 
For a thicker consistency only use 2 tbsp of oil and no water – this makes a good ‘dip’  
 
 148 Vegetables  
 
Celery & aubergine  
 
4 celery st alks - chopped  
1 L aubergine - chunks  
1 cup coriander - chopped  Pinch of turmeric  
Salt & pepper (opt)  
Ghee  
 
Place ½ tsp of ghee in a wok, heat and add turmeric & celery. Fry for 2 mins, stirring all the time. Add ½ cup of 
hot water.  Cook on medium heat u ntil all the liquid has gone.  Add the aubergine and half the coriander and fry 
for further 1 min. Add ½ ltr of hot water, bring to the boil, and then turn the heat to low.  Cook until the 
vegetables are soft.  Add the remaining coriander and salt/pepper a nd serve.  
 
Aubergine & courgettes  
 
1 L aubergine – thickly chopped  
3 M courgettes – thickly chopped  
½ tsp oregano  
1 tsp salt  
1 tsp beetroot – grated  ½ tsp turmeric  
1 tsp thyme  
1 bay leaf  
1t basil  
1 tbsp ghee  
 
Stir fry aubergine and courgettes in ghee for  1-2 mins.  
Add all other ingredients and 2 cups hot water and simmer for 5 mins.  
Add beetroot and turmeric just before serving.  
 
Tasty broth  
 
1 L celery stick  
3 cauliflower leaves  
5 carrots - juiced  
Ginger root – 3 L slices  
1 tsp fennel seeds  ½ pineappl e – diced  
1 cup fresh coriander - chopped  
1t salt  
Pepper  
 
In 1½ ltr water simmer all ingredients until cooked (except the carrot juice and coriander) and then strain. Add 
coriander and carrot juice and then serve.  
 
Vegetable stew 
 
1 M butternut - chopped  
5 M carrots - sticks  
1 M aubergine - diced  
2 courgettes - diced  I fennel bulb - chopped  
½ tsp thyme  
½ tsp paprika  
Salt/pepper  
 
Dry-fry the herbs/spices in ghee and then add the carrots and fennel and 1cup of hot water. When all the liquid 
has gone add the other vegetables and 1ltr hot water and cook for 30mins.  Add salt/pepper to taste.  
 
Spicy courgettes  
 
2 M courgettes – thin strips  
2 tsp ginger – grated  ½ cup carrot juice  
1 tsp ghee  
 
Prepare the courgettes. Heat the ghee and fry the ginger until go lden brown. Add the courgettes and continue to 
fry until they appear slightly browned – stir occasionally. Add the carrot juice and simmer until the courgettes 
are tender and the liquid has almost gone.  
 
 
 
 
 149  
Spinach & celery  
 
1 tbsp ghee  
3½ lb spinach  
6 celery stalks - small pieces  
1 tsp vata churna  1 tbsp soy sauce  
1 tbsp tarragon  
1 tbsp thyme  
½ tsp nutmeg - grated  
 
Heat the ghee and sauté the spinach until tender. Barely cover with water and add everything but the nutmeg.  
Simmer for about 10 minutes.  Serve warm with a sprinkling of nutmeg.  
 
Chunky veg 
 
1 aubergine  
2 courgettes  
4  baby mooli   1 tsp kapha churna or jerk  
1-2 tsp ghee  
 
Chop the vegetables into large chunks. Mix the mooli and courgettes with the spices -  leave for 15 mins. Heat 
half th e ghee in a wok and stir -fry the aubergine for 1mins and then remove and set aside. Add the rest of the 
ghee, courgettes and mooli to the wok and stir fry for 2 min. Add 1 cup boiling water and simmer until all the 
water has gone. Then add the aubergine an d 2 cup of boiling water and simmer until all vegetables are cooked.  
 
Glazed carrots  
 
8oz carrots - sliced  
½ tsp ghee  1 tbsp soy sauce  
1 tsp maple syrup  
 
Steam or boil carrots until tender and then stain. Heat the ghee in a frying pan and stir -fry the ca rrots until 
slightly browned. Add soy sauce and maple syrup. Toss and serve.  
 
Curried sweet potatoes  
 
2 sweet potatoes - cubed  
½ leek stem - finely sliced  
1 garlic clove – chopped (or pinch hing)  ½ tsp black pepper, salt and turmeric  
1 tsp kapha churna  
Ghee 
 
Boil sweet potatoes until almost cooked.  Strain (keep the liquid).  Heat the ghee in a wok, add the onion and 
garlic and fry until golden brown.  Add the spices and stir for 1 min.  Add potatoes and stir for 2 mins. Add the 
potato water, bring to boil  and then turn heat down.  Cook until liquid reduced to half.  Place in an ovenproof 
dish, cook on gas mark 5, for ½ hr.  Serve.  
 
Fennel & red peppers  
 
2 fennel bulbs – L chunks  
(steamed until almost soft)  
1 red pepper – cut in strips  Sesame seeds (opt)  
1 tsp ghee  
 
Heat the ghee in a wok, add the sesame seeds and fry for 1 min.  Add fennel and pepper and fry for 1 -2 mins. 
with 1 cup hot water until soft.  Serve.  
 
Butternut puree  
 
1 M carrot - chopped  
1 M butternut – chopped  
1 M courgette - chopped  
1 M f ennel  - chopped  Pinch nutmeg  
1 ½ ltrs hot water  
¼ tsp pepper
 
Place all the ingredients in a saucepan and cover with hot water. Bring to boil and simmer until water has almost 
gone.  Liquidize or mash and serve hot as a side dish.  
 
 150 Curry d ishes  
 
 
Caulifl ower curry  
 
1 M cauliflower - florets  
2 M apples - chopped small  
1 tbsp sultanas  
2 M carrots - diced  
½ aubergine - chopped  
2 tsp ground coriander  2 tsp ground cumin  
1 tsp ground ginger  
Salt/pepper to taste  
½ tsp ground cinnamon  
1 cup coriander – fr esh  
 
Fry cauliflower in 1 tsp of ghee for 4 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add 1 cup boiling water and the other 
vegetables, keep the heat on high and stir slowly until all the water has gone. Stir in all other ingredients. Add 2 
cup of hot water and simmer, s tirring once or twice and adding more liquid if required. Add fresh coriander and 
serve.  
 
Vata, pitta or kapha curry  
 
1 apple - chopped  
2-3 dates - chopped  
1 tsp ginger chopped  
3 M fennel - chopped  
2 M carrots - grated  
1 celery stick - chopped  
6 green be ans 1t turmeric  
1 cup butternut squash – chopped  
2 tsp churna (vata or pitta or kapha)  
1 tsp cumin  
1 tsp cardamom  
1 ltr boiling water  
2 tsp ghee  
 
Coat vegetables with the herbs/spices and leave for 10 -20 mins. Heat the ghee and dry -fry for 2 mins, stirrin g 
continuously. Add 1 cup boiling water and cook until liquid has gone. Add the rest of the water and bring to the 
boil. Simmer until the vegetables are cooked. Serve with rice.  
 
Squash & fennel curry  
 
1 M butternut squash - chopped  
2 cups fennel - choppe d  
1 cup carrots - chopped  
3 cups water  
1t ground cumin  1t ground cardamom  
1t salt  
1t turmeric  
1T fresh coriander - chopped  
½ ltr coconut milk  
 
Heat 1 tsp ghee and then add vegetables and herbs/spices.  Add the water and bring to the boil - simmer for 
25mins.  Add the milk and simmer for a few minutes.  Add coriander just before serving.  
 
Sweet korma  
 
½ red pepper - sliced  
1 courgette - sliced  
1 M aubergine - cubes  
½ sweet apple - chopped  
½ cup dates - chopped  
½ cup raisins  
1t fresh ginger - grated  1t  ground cardamom  
¼ tsp nutmeg - grated  
Salt & pepper  
1 tsp Ghee  
2 tsp korma mix  
1 cup coconut milk  
 
Melt ghee in a wok, add the red pepper and stir -fry for 1 min. Add ½ cup of water and cook until all the liquid 
has gone. Add the courgette and cook for 1 mi n. Then add the rest of the ingredients and ¼ ltr of water.  Bring to 
the boil and then turn heat to low and simmer until the vegetables are cooked.  Add coconut milk and simmer for 
2 mins. Serve.  
 
 151 Rice d ishes  
 
 
Cooking rice:  Place rice in sieve and wash  thoroughly under tap – until water is clear. Add to saucepan and cover with water – 2cm above 
rice (for wild rice – f irst heat a little ghee in a saucepan, add rice and stir -f ry f or 1 min.  Add 1 cup hot water and cook until liquid has gone).  
Bring to bo il and simmer with lid on for approx. 15 mins. Remove lid and cook for a further 2 mins. Serve.  
 
Coconut -sesame rice dish  
 
2 C Basmati rice  
2 tsp ghee  
Water  
1 tsp salt  ¼ tbsp sesame seeds  
¼ tbsp desiccated coconut  
Coriander - chopped  
 
Cook rice for about  15 mins and remove from heat. In separate saucepan heat ghee and add the sesame seeds and 
coconut - stir until they darken slightly. Pour immediately into cooked rice and toss with coriander. Serve.  
 
Aborrio rice 
 
2 cups aborrio rice  
Salt & pepper  
2 tsp olive oil  4 saffron strands  
½ tsp turmeric  
 
Cover rice with water. Fry the saffron stands, turmeric, black pepper in the olive oil to release the flavour and 
add this to the rice.  Cook the rice.  Serve.  
 
Mediterranean risotto  
 
1 ½ cups basmati rice  
3 ½ cups mixed veg  
2 bay leaves  
1 tsp turmeric  
½ tsp thyme  
½ tsp basil  1 tsp salt  
Black pepper - pinch  
2 tbsp ghee or olive oil  
2 tbsp pesto (basil)  
12 black olives  
1 tsp oregano  
 
Briefly fry all the herbs in the ghee/olive oil. Add the chopped vegetables ( except olives) and stir -fry for 1 min. 
on a high heat. Add 1 cup boiling water and simmer until the vegetables are cooked..  Cook Basmati rice 
separately with turmeric and add to the vegetables when cooked. Add olives and serve.  
 
Indian pilau rice  
 
2 cups  basmati rice  
3 cups mixed vegetables - diced  
1½ tbsp raisins  
3 cloves  
1 tbsp cumin seeds  
1 tsp fenugreek seeds  
1 tsp cardamom  2 bay leaves  
1 tbsp ginger - grated  
1 tsp cinnamon  
1½ tsp turmeric  
3 cups water  
3 tsp ghee  
 
Fry the spices in the ghee until the  cumin seeds have darkened. Add the vegetables and ½ cup hot water and dry -
fry for 5 minutes. Add the rice and turmeric and continue to stir -fry for a few minutes. Add the salt and water, 
bring to boil, cover and turn down low.  Leave to cook for 20 minute s. 
 
 
 
 
 152 Grain d ishes  
 
 
Buckwheat, bulgur wheat, millet, cracked wheat, rye, quinoa:  Heat a little ghee in a wok and stir -fry grain for 1 min.  Add one cup of hot 
water and cook until the liquid has gone.  Repeat this process until all the grain is soft.  Add herbs/spices.  
 
Barley:  Wash barley, place in saucepan and add water (1 litre per cup).  Bring to boil and simmer for 15 mins.  Strain off l iquid (can be put 
in flask and used as a herbal tea) and add to soup or main meal.  
 
Plain Couscous:  Cover with boiling water – it is fully cooked once all the water has been absorbed.  For a spicy couscous heat a little ghee in 
a wok, add herbs/spices and couscous and stir -fry for 1 -2 mins. before adding boiling water.  
 
Couscous & carrot  
 
4 oz couscous  
1 red pepp er  - chopped  
3 carrots - grated  
½ cup of fresh peas  
1 tsp cashew nuts – ground (not on PK diet)  
1 tsp pumpkin seeds - roasted  
1 tsp ginger -grated  2 tsp soy sauce (not on PK diet)  
Hing (asafoetida) - pinch  
½ tsp paprika  
Salt & pepper  
Ghee or olive oil  
½ ltr hot water  
 
Heat the ghee in a wok and then add the pepper, carrots, peas and ginger.  Fry for approx 2 mins.  Add the 
cashew nuts and pumpkin seeds and fry for a further 2 mins.  
Add 2 cups of hot water and cook on a med. heat until the vegetables are s oft and the liquid has almost gone. 
Add the hing, paprika, salt, pepper and couscous and stir together.  Stir in the rest of the water.  The couscous 
should have absorbed all the liquid and be separated.  Place in small to medium sized bowls, compress and the n 
turn out on plates.  
 
Nut loaf 
 
1 cup millet  
1 cup red lentils - cooked  
2 broccoli florets  
½ S fennel  
½ red pepper  
½ yellow pepper  
½ cup sunflower seeds  ½ cup cashew nuts  
1 tsp sesame seeds  
1 inch ginger - f r e s h  
1 tsp sage - ground  
1 tsp oregano  
Salt/pepper - pinch  
2 tsp ghee  
 
Put all the seeds, nuts, vegetables herbs/spices into a food processor and grind. Heat ghee in a wok and add 
millet – stir-fry for 2 mins. Add 1 cup boiling water - when liquid has gone repeat process twice more. Turn heat 
off, add the other ingredients and turn into oiled loaf tin – cover with foil. Bake at gas 6 for 45 – 90 mins (or 
until it slightly shrinks from sides). Remove from oven and let cool for 5 mins. Remove from tin and leave to 
stand for a further 5 mins before ser ving.  
 
Country loaf 
 
1 cup  basmati rice  
1 cup red lentils  
1 cup mixed ground seeds  
½ red pepper  ½ leek  
½ cup fresh basil  
Salt, pepper , hing (pinch of each)  
 
Cook the rice and lentils  in 4 cups of water until soft and the water has almost gone . Finely ch op the red pepper 
and leek and steam for ten minutes. Add all the ingredients  together  (it should resembles a cake mixture – if 
consistency seems too watery you may add some wholemeal flour to thicken). P lace mixture in an oiled loaf tin,  
cover with foil and bake at gas 6 for 45 mins (or until it slightly shrinks from sides).  When firm and almost 
ready remove foil and bake for a further 5 mins.  Remove from oven and let cool for 5 mins.  Remove from tin 
and leave to stand for a further 5 mins.  As an alter native the loaf tin may be lined with wilted spinach leaves 
before the mixture goes in  the oven . 
 
 153 Soups  
 
 
Vegetable stock  
 
½ cup peas - fr esh  
1 celery stalk/leaves -chopped  
¼ cup parsley - chopped  1 carrot - chopped  
½ red pepper - chopped  
4 ½ cup water  
 
Bring all the ingredients to the boil and then cover, reduce heat and simmer until tender.  Either strain out the 
vegetables or puree them into the stock.  
 
C r e a m o f  asparagus soup  
 
300g asparagus  
3 cup coconut or seed milk (see milk recipes)  
1 tbsp pumpk in seeds - ground  1 cup coriander - fr esh  
1 tsp ghee  
Salt/pepper - to taste  
 
Steam the asparagus until tender and then cut off the tips and set aside.  Heat the ghee in a small pan, add the 
hing and ground pumpkin seeds and sauté on a low heat for 30secs .  Stir while adding a little water to make a 
paste.  Add the milk and stir for further 30 secs.  Place in a blender with the asparagus stems and coriander and 
blend until smooth.  Reheat if necessary and then add the asparagus tips before serving.  
 
Celery soup  
 
1 celery head - chopped  
½ cup red lentils - cooked  
½ cup rice  
1t dill  
1 cup soya milk  1 tsp parsley  
9 cups water  
1t ghee  
5 M carrots - juiced  
 
First cook the lentils.  Then melt the ghee in a separate pan and the add herbs, celery, rice and 1 cup o f hot water 
- bring to the boil and simmer until all the liquid has been absorbed.  Add the rest of the water and the lentils and 
then bring to boil again and simmer for 45 mins.  Finally, liquidize with the soya milk and carrot juice and serve 
garnished w ith fres h he rbs.  
 
Rice & celery soup  
 
1 celery  - chopped  
4 celery stalks - juiced  
½ fennel – juiced  
½ cup rice  
1t ginger - grated  1t celery salt  
2 tsp fennel - ground  
1t ghee  
1 cup soya milk  
 
Cook the rice. Heat the ghee and add the rice, ginger, celery . Fry for I min. and then add 1 cup boiling water – 
cook until liquid has evaporated. Add ground fennel and I ltr of boiling water - simmer until celery is tender.  
Add the celery juice, fennel juice, soya milk and salt (blend for a smoother soup).  
 
Spinac h soup  
 
½ cup cooked basmati rice  
500g spinach (juice 250g)  
½ cup soya milk  1 tsp nutmeg - grated  
1 tsp ghee
 
Steam half the spinach until tender.  Heat the ghee and add nutmeg and rice – stir fry for one min.  Add 1 ltr hot 
water and bring to boil.  Add spinach and simmer for 2 mins.  Add milk and spinach juice and serve.  Add 
salt/pepper to taste.  
 
 154 Vegy broth  
 
5 carrots - juiced  
3 cauliflower florets - chopped  
1 courgette - diced  
½ red pepper - diced  4 celery sticks  
1 tsp dried dill  
1 carrot - diced  
4 raisins  
 
Add to 1 ltr water and simmer until vegetables are soft.  Add juice, blend and serve.  
 
Butternut squash soup  
 
1 M butternut - chopped  
½ cup red lentils  
1 tsp nutmeg  
Cinnamon – pinch  
1 tsp vata churna  ½ tsp ground ginger  
1 tsp ghee  
Salt/pepper to taste 
3 tbsp coriander - chopped  
 
Heat the ghee and then add the herbs (except coriander) and squash and fry for one minute.  Add the lentils and 1 
cup of boiling water.  Boil until liquid has gone and then repeat twice more.  Add 1 ½ litres of boiling wa t er  a n d  
simmer until cooked.  Blend the soup very thoroughly and add the coriander.  
 
Sweet potato & squash soup  
 
2 M sweet potatoes - diced  
1 M butternut squash - diced  
1 tsp basil  
Nutmeg - 2 pinches  
½ tsp ground ginger  Salt & pepper  
1 bay leaf  
1-2 tsp g hee (optional)  
2 tbsp milk or soya milk  
2 tbsp parsley or coriander - chopped  
 
Place all ingredients except the milk in a pan and cover with water. Bring to the boil and simmer for 35 - 45 mins 
until soft.  Add the ghee and milk and blend.  
Add the chopped  herbs and serve.  
 
Thermos flask lunch  
 
¼ cup yellow mung dhal  
¼ cup basmati rice  
1 ½ cup mixed vegetables – chopped  
Herbs/spices to taste  Salt/pepper  
1 tsp ghee  
1 ½ ltr boiling water  
 
 
Heat the ghee in a saucepan and stir -fry the herbs/spices (cumin, gi nger, coriander, dill etc) for 1 min. Add the 
other ingredients, stir and then add 2 cups of the boiling water. Rapidly cook until most of liquid has gone. Add 
the rest of the hot water, bring to boil for 2 -3 mins and then pour into flask.  Leave enough ga p at the top of the 
flask for rice/lentils to cook and swell. Ready in 3 -4 hours. Shake well before opening flask to mix contents 
thoroughly.  
 
Carrot & red lentil soup  
 
2 cups carrot juice  
½ kg carrots - grated  
2 L vegetable stock or water  
1 cup red lenti ls 
2 M fennel – chopped small  
1 cup fresh coriander  1 tsp fresh ginger - grated  
1 tsp cumin  
1 ½ tsp vata churna  
½ tsp cardamom  
Hing - pinch  
1 tsp ghee
 
First cook the lentils (see ‘dhal’ cooking instructions).  Then coat the vegetables with the herbs and l eave for 10 
mins.  Next, heat the ghee and fry the vegetables for 2 mins.  Add 2 cups stock or water, bring to boil and 
simmer until liquid has almost gone – stir occasionally.  Add to the cooked lentils and simmer until vegetables 
are soft.  Liquidize hal f the soup with ⅓ cup coriander and carrot juice; return to pot and cook for a further 2 
mins.  Garnish with coriander, salt, pepper and a little coconut milk if desired.  
 155 Hearty vegetable & red lentil soup  
 
2 carrots - grated  
1 celery stick – chopped sma ll 
2 courgettes – chopped small  
2 cups red lentils  
1 bunch asparagus - chopped  
½  cup fresh coriander  1 tsp fresh ginger - grated  
200 mls coconut milk  
2 tsp vata churna  
Hing - pinch  
1-2 tsp ghee
 
First cook the lentils (see ‘dhal’ cooking instructions).  H eat the ghee in a wok and dry -fry the hing and ginger - 
add the celery and stir.  Add 1 cup hot water and cook until the water has been absorbed.  Add the carrots and 
courgettes and another cup of hot water.  Whilst this is gently cooking, steam or simmer the asparagus and then 
add this to the rest of the soup mixture along with the vata churna and 1 ½ L hot water.  Bring to the boil and 
simmer until the vegetables are soft.  Add the coconut milk and coriander, simmer for 2 mins. and serve.  Add 
salt/pepper  if desired.  
 
Peya soup  
 
½ cup basmati rice  
½ cup split yellow mung beans  
2 tsp fresh ginger – grated  
½ cup fresh coriander  
¼ tsp turmeric  ½ tsp cumin  
salt/pepper  
½ tsp coriander  
½ tsp cardamom  
1 tsp ghee  
 
Soak the rice and beans overnight (red lentils m ay be substituted if split yellow mung beans are difficult to 
obtain).  Place the rice/dhal in a sieve and wash thoroughly under a cold tap until the water is clear. Cook the 
mixture as basic dhal (see dhal section) but adding more water near the end to ma ke a thin soup – it should then 
be simmered for 20 minutes more.  Fry the ginger, turmeric, cumin, salt/pepper, coriander, and cardamom in the 
ghee and then add to the dhal mixture.  Mix in most of the fresh coriander but save a little to use as a garnish.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 156 Desserts  
 
 
Baked pears & apples  
 
1 apple or pear - cored  
4 dates - quartered  
2 tbsp raisins  2 dried apricots - quartered  
2 cups apple juice  
 
Mix the dried fruits together and pack them into apple core.  Place in a small ovenproof dish and pour over the 
apple juice. Cover and bake at gas 5/160 C for 30 minutes, checking after 15 mins (apples sometimes take 
longer).  
 
Apricot fool 
 
2 cups dried apricots (soaked)  
½ vanilla pod  1 apple  
½ cup soya milk  
 
Cover fruit with water, add vanilla pod and br ing to the boil. Simmer until all the liquid has gone, remove vanilla 
pod and add milk. Liquidise until smooth.  Serve.  
 
Mango dream  
 
3 very ripe mangos  100 mls coconut milk  
 
De-stone the mango and place in a blender with the coconut milk. Blend until sm ooth.  
 
Mango & pawpaw  
 
1 pawpaw  
6 red grapes  1 mango  
 
Liquidise the grapes and pawpaw. Place in serving dish. Liquidise mango and pour over pawpaw/grapes.  
 
Almond delight  
 
1 tsp honey  
1 cup almonds (soaked overnight)  2 tsp yoghurt  
 
Dry the almonds and place in a grinder - grind into small pieces.  Mix with the honey and yoghurt.  Top with a 
sprig of mint.  
 
Strawberry delight  
 
6 strawberries  
1 tsp maple syrup  1 tbsp Udo’s oil  
1 tsp coconut milk  
 
Liquidise all the ingredients and use as a fruit topping.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 157 Herbal t eas 
 
 
Digestive tea (drink during meals)  
 
2 tsp cardamom seeds  2 tsp fennel seeds  
 
Add seeds to flask and add 1 ltr boiling water.  
 
Post digestiv e tea (for after meals)  
 
2 cups of boiling water  
1 tsp coriander seeds  1 tsp fennel seeds  
1 tsp cumin seeds  
 
Place seeds in blender and blend for 30 secs. Add water and blend for further 30 secs. Strain and serve.  
 
Ginger tea 
 
1 ltr boiling water  4 slices fresh ginger  
 
Place ginger in flask and add boiling water.  
 
Hibiscus tea 
 
1 ltr boilin g wa t er  
1 cinnamon stick  2 tsp hibiscus  
1 tsp grated fresh ginger  
 
Bring water to the boil and add all the ingredients.  
Cover and turn heat to low. Simmer for 10 mins.  
Strain and serve unsweetened (or add ½ tsp honey when tea has cooled to body temp). Thi s tea is excellent for 
relieving and preventing cold/flu (as a preventative add more ginger to the mix).  
 
Ajwan tea 
 
½ ltr boiling water  ½ tsp ajwan seeds  
 
Pour boiling water over seeds and let sit for 5 mins.  
Strain serve unsweetened (or add ½ tsp hone y if desired)  
This tea is good for relieving lung congestion but be careful if you have asthma.  
 
Raisin tea 
 
½ cup washed raisins
 
Place raisins in flask and add 1 litre of boiling water. Allow to steep for 15 minutes. Raisins can be eaten after 
you’ve f inished drinking the tea.  
 
Barley tea 
 
½ cup organic barley
 
Soak barley for ½ hour and then rinse.  Place the barley and 1 litre of water in a saucepan and bring to boil.  
Simmer until soft and then strain into flask.  The cooked barley can be used in so up. 
 
 158  
 
Vata tea 
 
½ tsp whole cumin seeds  
½ tsp whole coriander seeds  
½ tsp fennel seeds  
3 pinches of ashwagandha root powder  
1 pinch whole -root licorice powder  
 
Boil 1 litre  of water. Add spices and cover to steep. Pour it into your thermos and drink thro ughout the day.    
Drinking beverages at a warm temperature is best for Vata types.  
 
Pitta tea 
 
2 pinches of Indian Sarsaparilla powder  
¼ tsp cumin seeds  
2 pinches of licorice powder  
½ tsp. fennel seeds  
½ tsp coriander seeds  
 
Boil 1 litre  of water. Add spic es and cover to steep. Pour it into your thermos and drink throughout the day.     
Let the water cool to room temperature before drinking as this is best for Pitta types.  
 
Kapha tea 
 
2 thin slices of fresh ginger root  
2 basil leaves  
2 whole cloves  
½ tsp who le cumin seeds  
2 pinches licorice powder  
 
Boil 1 litre  of water. Add spices and cover to steep. Pour it into your thermos and drink throughout the day.    
Drinking beverages at a warm to hot temperature is best for Kapha types. Sip during and after meals.  
 
Detoxifying tea 
 
¼ tsp. whole cumin  
½ tsp whole coriander,  
½ tsp whole fennel  
Boil 1 litre  of water. Add to the spices and let steep for ten minutes with the lid on. Strain out the spices and 
pour water into a thermos and sip throughout the day.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 159 Lassi & Raita  
 
 
Plain lassi  
 
1 cup yoghurt  
3 cup water  Sugar (or jaggery) to taste  
½ tsp cardamom  
 
Whisk together and serve. For warding off gas and bloating  add 1 pinch ground ginger, 1 pinch g round cumin, 1 
pinch ground coriander, 1 pinch salt  and d rink after lunch.  
 
Lassi zinger  
 
½ cup yoghurt  
1 cup water  
2 tsp honey  
Pinch cinnamon  Pinch ginger powder  
Pinch black pepper  
Pinch ground cumin  
3 cardamom seeds  
 
Blend all the ingredients. This drink has a kick and is best for kapha types (pitta types bewar e!). 
 
Mango lassi  
 
1 cup yoghurt  
Pulp of 1 mango  
½ tsp cardamom  ¼ tsp nutmeg  
2 tsp honey  
3 cup water
 
Whisk together and serve.  
 
Banana lassi  
 
1 cup yoghurt  
1 banana  
2 tsp maple syrup  ½ tsp cardamom  
3 cup water
 
Whisk together and serv e. 
 
Raita I  
 
1 cup  cucumber  
1 tbsp yoghurt  I cup salted water  
 
Finely chop the cucumber and cover with salted water for 10 mins. Strain through a sieve and with the back of a 
spoon carefully squeeze out excess moisture. Mix in the yoghurt and then blend briefly or fork mi x. Add 
salt/pepper to taste.  
 
Raita II  
 
¼ tsp freshly roasted ground cumin  1 cup plain yoghurt  
 
Stir in most of the cumin and sprinkle rest on top.  Cover and refrigerate for 30 mins before serving.  Add finely 
shredded carrots or radishes (or other vege table) if desired.  
 160 Fruit & vegetable j uices  
 
 
Homemade fruit & vegetable j uices  
 
A delight to the taste buds and an elixir of life to the body.  They contain an abundant supply of vitamins, 
minerals, antioxidants, and nutritional enzymes and are easily d igested by the body.  One or two pints of juice 
per day can be consumed but raw/cooked fruits and vegetables should also form part of a daily diet to help 
cleanse the colon and keep it functioning properly.  
 
Vata balancing juices:  
 
Apple (good for headache s, asthma and arthritis)  
Lemon & ginger  (good for migraines)  
Beetroot, carrot & cucumber (good for headaches and weight loss)  
Apple, guava & potato (good for insomnia)  
Grape (good for rheumatism, dry skin, constipation)  
Beetroot (good for gaining weight a nd as a liver cleanser)  
Apricot, cranberry, orange, peach, pineapple, pomegranate (variety of combination)  
Asparagus, carrot, cucumber, green beans, turnip, pumpkin (variety of combinations)  
 
Pitta balancing juices:  
 
Carrot & ginger (good for eyes)  
Carrot & Spinach (purifies the blood and good for weight loss)  
Watermelon (refreshing & cooling)  
Peach, pineapple, pomegranate, prune, apple, grape (variety of combinations)  
Asparagus, celery, potato, cucumber, peas, leeks, cabbage (variety of combinations)  
 
Kaph a balancing juices:  
 
Grape (good for constipation)  
Carrot, cucumber & celery (good for weight loss)  
Orange, pomegranate & papaya (reduces constipation)  
Apples, pears, berries, cherries, peaches, prunes, mangoes (variety of combinations)  
Asparagus, carrot, potato, celery, spinach (variety of combinations)  
 
 
 161 Other drinks & d igestives  
 
 
Hot water  
Boil water, preferably distilled, and then pour into a small, stainless steel flask.  Small sips should be taken 
frequently throughout the day.  Hot water reduces t oxicity/impurities in the tissues and is very good for digestion 
and weight loss.  It is balancing to the physiology of all body types and is a general cleanser and purifier of the 
body.  Add fresh ginger, lemon or peppermint for extra flavour if desired.  
 
Nourishing milk drink  
1 cup of organic milk  8 – 10 raisins  
2 tsp of root ginger  Pinch of turmeric  
Pinch of cardamom  ½ tsp Ghee  
½ inch of vanilla pod  Pinch of nutmeg  
Place all the ingredients (except ghee) in a heavy bottomed, stainless steel saucepan.  Bring slowl y to the boil 
and simmer for two minutes, stirring continuously.  Add ghee, pour into cup and drink slowly.  Soya or rice milk 
may be used for those who are lactose intolerant.  Boiling milk breaks down it’s proteins making it much easier 
to dig est and causing less congestion/mucus than if taken cold – it should not be taken with meals but alone for 
breakfast and/or before bedtime.  
According to Ayurvedic texts milk is rejuvenating, strengthening and nourishing – it also soothes the mind and 
promo tes longevity.  It is high in calcium and, contrary to popular belief, has been shown to lower cholesterol 
levels.  Even people diagnosed with lactose intolerances are able to digest small quantities of boiled milk, 
especially once the above ingredients ar e added.  
 
Ginger pickle  
½ tsp ginger   grated  
½ tsp lemon juice  freshly squeezed  
½ tsp honey   cold-pressed/organic  
Salt   pinch  
The above is enough for one serving but it is far more convenient to make one week’s supply at a time.  
To do this, simply grate  enough fresh ginger to fill half a jam jar, cover with lemon juice and store in a 
refrigerator.  Twenty minutes before lunch and evening meal take 1 tsp. of the ginger/lemon mix, add honey (to 
taste) and a pinch of salt.  
Taking ginger pickle regularly hel ps maintain a strong, healthy digestion and improves the 
metabolism/assimilation of nutrients from the food you intake.  From an Ayurvedic standpoint, it contains all six 
tastes (sweet, sour, salty, bitter, pungent and astringent) required to satisfy the p alate and leaves the body feeling 
balanced and satisfied after eating.  
 
Date recipe  
Soak 10 -15 dates overnight.  Cook for 10 -15 minutes, remove stones and then blend with 1 tsp ghee and a pinch 
of cardamom.  This is good with breakfast or as an afternoon p ick-me-up as it feeds and nourishes the 
physiology on a very deep level.  
 
 
 162 Milk Drinks  
(Add to soups, deserts, breakfast cereals & sauces)  
 
 
Coconut milk 
 
500ml hot water   180g coconut – grated  
 
Puree the water and coconut in a blender until fairly smooth and allow to stand for 10 minutes.  Line a sieve with 
a piece of muslin and strain the liquid through it.  Squeeze out any remaining liquid from the cloth.  This drink is 
balancing for vata and pitta dosha types.  
 
Almond milk 
 
½ cup almonds  
500 – 700mls wa ter (hot or cold)  
 
Soak the almonds overnight in a little water.  Drain and then grind the nuts and then place in a blender with the 
water and mix until smooth.  
 
 
Pumpkin or sunflower seed milk  
 
½ cup pumpkin seeds (or sunflower seeds)  
500 - 700mls water  
 
Grind the seeds and then place in a blender and mix until smooth.  
 
 
Soy milk 
 
170g soya beans  
1 ltr water (hot or cold)  
 
Clean the beans and soak overnight in plenty of water.  Puree the beans and water in a blender until smooth and 
then strain the mixture  through a muslin cloth.  It may be stored refrigerated for up to a week.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 163 Ghee  
 
 
Making ghee at home  
 
• Place 2 lb of UNSALTED, organic butter into a heavy bottomed, stainless steel saucepan and slowly 
melt on a low heat.  
 
• Continue to cook sl owly, keeping a wary eye all the while as it burns easily if heated too fast or on too 
high a heat.  Bubbles will be seen rising to the surface and a residue of milk solids will be seen forming 
on the surface.  This usually clears in the middle allowing yo u to observe the liquid changing colour 
beneath and milk solids forming on the base of the pan.  
 
• When ready (about 30 mins), the ghee turns a transparent golden brown colour and bubbles begin to 
stop rising to the surface (the bubbles are the water conten t of the butter evaporating).  The ghee burns 
very quickly at this stage so remove from the heat as soon as the milk solids on the bottom of the pan 
begin to turn brown and most of the bubbles have stopped rising.  
 
• Wait until the ghee has cooled but is sti ll in a liquid form and then strain the ghee through a piece of 
muslin cloth into a suitable container - jam jars work well.  
 
• Ghee has a long shelf life if stored in tightly sealed jars.  Refrigeration is unnecessary.  
 
 
 
 
W h y  is it so good for you ? 
 
• Ghee i s cow’s butter with the milk solids and water content removed and is a very pure food.  It aids 
digestion, strengthens the body, increases energy levels, improves memory and brain functioning and 
increases longevity.  
 
• It strengthens and balances the physio logy but doesn’t raise cholesterol or clog the liver and arteries.  
This is due to its chemical makeup - predominantly short -chain fatty acids which are easily absorbed, 
assimilated and metabolised by the body for energy release.  Ghee is high in antioxida nts (free radical 
scavengers) and high in monounsaturated fatty acids, which are associated with the prevention of cancer 
and heart disease.  It also contains linoleic acid, a chemical that may have anti -carcinogenic properties, 
as well as vitamins A, D, E  & K.  
 
• Taking 1 tsp to 2 tbsp daily will greatly improve your health but any more than that will start to have 
the opposite effect and reduce digestive efficiency.  
 
• Ghee can be spread on toast, used to fry herbs and spices or simply added to vegetables du ring cooking.  
It can also be used medicinally to help heal burns, reduce skin inflammations and on haemorrhoids and 
eczema where it is especially effective combined with equal parts of pure Aloe Vera gel.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 164 How to make chapatis  
 
 
Ingredients:  
1 cup chapatti flour  
Cold water  
 
• Mix the chapatti flour with enough water to make a soft dough ball.  
• Kneed for two to five minutes.  
• Cover the dough with a small damp towel/kitchen roll.  
• Leave in the fridge for half an hour.  
• Kneed the dough again for two to f ive minutes.  
• Divide dough into four to six small balls.  
• Roll each ball into very thin saucer -sized chapattis on a ‘floured’ board.  
• Heat a flat skillet or frying pan (med. heat).  
• Place one chapatti on the skillet for approx. 30 secs.  
• Turn over with a fish s lice and heat until it begins to rise a little.  
• Turn the chapatti over again and remove once it has risen slightly.  
• Repeat this process with the rest of the chapattis.  
• Serve with a drizzle of ghee or Udo’s oil.  
 
(opt: Vata churna can be added to the dough mix at the start of the process)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 165 For the kitchen  
 
 
 
Implements  
 
Oscar Juicer  
Water Distiller  Blender  
Food Processor  Grinder  
Wok  
 
 
Herbs  
 
Aniseed  
Asafoetida (hing)  
Basil  
Bay Leaves  
Black Pepper  
Caraway Seeds  
Cardamom  
Cardamom Seeds  
Cayen ne 
Cinnamon  
Cinnamon Sticks  
Cloves  
Coriander  Coriander seeds  
Cumin  
Cumin Seeds  
Curry Powder  
Dill 
Fennel  
Fennel Seeds  
Fenugreek  
Ginger  
Hibiscus  
Mint  
Mustard Seeds  
Nutmeg  Oregano  
Paprika  
Parsley  
Peppercorns  
Rosemary  
Saffron  
Sage  
Tarragon  
T h y m e  
Turmeric  
Vanil la Pods  
 
Dried fruits  
 
Apricots  
Dates  Figs 
Pears  Raisin s  
Sultanas  
 
 
Grains/pulses/lentils  
 
Aborrio Rice  
Bar ley  
Basmati Rice  
Buckwheat  Bulgur Wheat  
Chapatti Flour  
Couscous  
Gram (chickpea Flour)  Millet  
Red Lentils  
Yellow Mung Dhal  
 
 
Nuts/ seeds  
 
Almond s 
Cashew Nuts  Pine Nuts  
Pumpkin Seeds  Sesame Seeds  
Sunflower Seeds  
 
 
Oils 
 
Flax 
Ghee  Olive  
Pumpkin  Sunflower  
Ud o’ s  
 
 
Miscellaneous  
 
Honey  
Jaggery  
Maple Syrup  
Date Syrup  
Steva Extract  
Balsamic Vinegar  
Black Olives  
Celery Salt  Cider Vinegar  
Desiccated Co conut  
Mustard  
Pesto  
Soy Sauce  
Salt 
Coconut Milk  
Oat Milk  Rice Milk  
Soya Milk  
 166 Chapter 9  
Inspirational  quotes & s ayings  
~ from around the world & through the ages  ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I was free and I had shrunk.  I was so tiny, almost like a minute par ticle of dust.  
Everything was within me.  The whole Universe was inside me.  
Light beings disappeared and new ones appeared.  
We were linked together with connecting radiating beams.  
We were as one.  We are all connected with each other.  
If we only realised how closely we are connected,  
we would never be able to hurt each other.    
~ Shanti Devi  ~ 
 

 167 Desiderata  
 
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste  
And remember what peace there may be in silence.  
 
As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with  all persons.  
Speak the truth clearly, and listen to others, even the dull and ignorant:  
They too have their story.  
 
Avoid loud and aggressive persons; they are vexations to the spirit.  
If you compare yourself to others you may become vain and bitter,  
For always there will be greater and lesser persons than yourself.  
 
Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans.  
Keep interested in your career however humble;  
It is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time.  
 
Exercise caution in your business affa irs, for the world is full of trickery.  
But let this not blind you from what virtue there is;  
Many persons strive for high ideals, and everywhere life is full of heroism.  
 
Be yourself, especially do not feign affection.  
Neither be cynical about love;  
For i n the face of all aridity and disenchantment, it is as perennial as the grass.  
Take kindly the counsel of years gracefully surrendering the things of youth.  
 
Nurture the strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune.  
But do not stress yourself with  imaginings.  
Many fatigues are born of fear and loneliness.  
Beyond a wholesome discipline, be gentle with yourself.  
 
You are a child of the universe, no less than the trees and the stars:  
You have a right to be here.  
And whether or not it is clear to you,  
No doubt the universe is unfolding as it should.  
 
Therefore be at peace with God,  
Whatever you conceive Him to be.  
Whatever your labours and aspiration, in the noisy confusion of life,  
Keep peace with your soul.  
With all its shams, drudgery and broken drea ms, it is still a beautiful world.  
Be careful.  
Strive to be happy.  
Unknown  
 
Learn to be silent.  
Let your quiet mind listen and absorb.  
Pythagoras  
 
All man’s miseries derive from not being able to sit quietly in a room alone.  
Blaise Pascal  
 
 
 168 Do not be desir ous of having things done quickly.  
Do not look at small advantages.  
Desire to have things done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly.  
Looking at small advantages prevents great affairs from being accomplished.  
Confucius  
 
When you are inspired by som e great purpose,  
some extraordinary project,  
all your thoughts break their bonds;  
your mind transcends limitations,  
your consciousness expands in every direction,  
and you find yourself in a new, great and wonderful world.  
Dormant forces, faculties and tale nts become alive,  
and you discover yourself to be a greater person by far  
than you every dreamed yourself to be.  
Patanjali  
 
Men are disturbed not by  things that happen,  
but by their opinions of the things that happen.  
Epicitetus  
 
God sleeps in the minerals , 
awakens in the plants,  
walks in the animals,  
and thinks in you.  
Ancient Sanskrit saying  
 
Before enlightenment; chopping wood, carrying water.  
After enlightenment; chopping wood, carrying water.  
Zen proverb  
 
Every now and then go away, have a little relax ation,  
For when you come back to your work your judgement will be surer;  
Since to remain constantly at work will cause you to lose power of judgement…  
Go some distance away because the work appears smaller and more of it can be 
taken in at a glance, and a lack of harmony or proportion is more readily seen.  
Leonardo Da Vinci  
 
The greatest danger for most of us is not that our aim is too high and we miss it, 
but that it is too low and we reach it.  
Michelangelo  
 
Great spirits have always encountered violent op position form mediocre minds.  
Albert Einstein  
 
Look well to this day for it is life; the very best of life.  
In its brief course lie all the realities and truths of existence.  
The joy of growth; the splendour of action; the glory of power.  
For yesterday is only a memory and tomorrow is only a vision,  
But today, if well lived, makes every yesterday a memory of happiness  
and every tomorrow a vision of hope.  
Look well therefore to this day.  
Ancient Sanskrit poem  
 
 169 To live a creative life we must lose our fear of  being wrong.  
Joseph Chilton Pearce  
 
In creating, the only hard part is to begin.  
James Russell Lowell  
 
Emotions are like guests.  They should be treated very nicely and gently, and sent 
away if they don’t fit in.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
Your heart has not to open to  others.  
Your heart has to open to yourself.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
If somebody is terribly bad, thank God that it is not you.  
And if somebody is terribly good, thank God that you have seen something good, 
and that it could be you.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
Your brain will relea se thoughts, one thousand per wink of the eye.  So you have 
no thinking power; you only have pursuing power.  It is up to you which thoughts 
you will pursue.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
When a negative thought hits you, hit it with a positive thought – you will come 
out the best.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
You will be tested – but that is the nature of life.  When it is rough, be very calm.  
Go inside and find your soul.  Be neutral and meditate, and the way will become 
more clear.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
Go inside and listen to your inner voice.   Every question has an answer.  Your soul 
is full of wisdom and knows the way.  
 
It is very important that we work to develop our intuitive power (which comes 
through meditation), for without intuition, we have doubt, which in turn creates 
duality and lead s us into crisis in our lives.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
Going through life without intuition is like driving a car which has no side 
mirror and no rear -view mirror.  All you can see is just straight ahead.  Yogi Bhajan  
If you can’t see God in All,  
Then you can’t see Go d at all.  
Yogi Bhajan  
 
If we think of defeat, that is what we get  
If we are undecided, nothing will happen to us.  
We must just pick something great and do it.  
Never think of failure at all,  
For as we are now, that is what we get.  
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  
 
 
 170 Enjoy your life and be happy,  
Being happy is of utmost importance.  
Success in anything is through happiness,  
More support of nature comes through being happy.  
Under all circumstances be happy,  
Even if you have to force it a little to change long -standing hab its. 
Just think of any negativity that comes to you  
As a raindrop falling on your ocean of bliss.  
You may not always have an ocean of bliss,  
But think that way anyway as it will help it to come.  
Doubting is not blissful and does not create happiness.  
Be ha ppy, healthy and let all that love  
Flow through your heart.  
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  
 
Keep your desires turning within and be patient.  
Allow the fulfilment to come to you  
Gently resist the temptation to chase your dreams into the world.  
Pursue them in your h eart until they disappear into the self,  
And leave them there.  
It may take a little discipline – be simple, be kind, stay rested.  
Attend to your own inner health and happiness.  
Happiness radiates like the fragrance from a flower  
And draws all good things t owards you.  
Allow your love to nourish yourself as well as others.  
Do not strain after your needs in life – 
It is sufficient to be quietly alert and aware of them.  
In this way life proceeds more naturally, effortlessly.  
Life is here to enjoy.  
Maharishi Mah esh Yogi  
 
When we live in the present nature works out our destiny.  
Nature is the best organiser.  
Simplicity and naturalness will bring success.  
Naturalness is the basis of happiness.  
If one poses to be someone else, one looses the charm of naturalness.  
The result is that one accumulates a stress.  
We do not think of life, we live it.  
We do not think of ourselves too much.  
We do not think of others too much.  
We just behave in a natural way.  
We do not make moods, or wonder what anyone thinks of us.  
We do not live life on the remarks of others.  
What others think is not our concern – it is their concern.  
If we are weak we will always put ourselves at the whim of others.  
We do not base our lives on the opinions of others.  
But if we are not clear in our conscience , then we will always be weak  
And will always mind the looks and remarks of other people.  
It is important only that we radiate life.  
Every individual must be a joy to himself, to his family and to society.  
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  
 
 
 171 Do not oppose, because in opposing the tenderness of the feeling level is crushed.  
All action should be to develop the fine feelings developed in the Sidhis.  
This is why we say speak the Truth; but see that you are speaking delicately.  
Do not speak non -truth and do not speak in a n on-sweet way,  
So that the feeling is nourished.  
The whole effect of activity is to enrich the feeling of the other.  
Be as delicate as possible.  
If a communication accomplishes something on the gross  
But damages something on the level of feeling, then it is  a spiritual loss.  
The feeling is more important to life.  
Nourishment of the feeling is the basis for growth of spiritual holistic value.  
Delicate behaviour on the surface should be as to nourish, uphold and enhance  
The transcendental value where feelings merge into a common source.  
Do not oppose; opposition is dangerous to immortality.  
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  
 
If a man does not keep pace with his companions,  
perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer.  
Let him step to the music which he hears, howeve r measured and far away.  
Henry David Thoreau  
 
When the mind is calm  
How quickly, how smoothly, how beautifully  
You will perceive everything!  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
We are the very consciousness  
Out of which this universe has been created  
Paramahansa Yogana nda 
 
We are gathered here to travel together for a while.  
Then in diverse direction we have to go;  
But if we have divine love in our souls,  
No matter where we go we shall meet again.  
We can never remain apart.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Infinity is our home.  
We are just sojourning awhile  
In the caravanserai of the body.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
What seems true to reason and perception is not always true in fact.  
The only sure way to know truth is to realise it intuitively.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Most people imita te others.  
You should be original.  
And whatever you do, do well.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Stillness is the vast spirit that lies behind all created things.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
 172 Live more simply, so that you can find time to enjoy the little pleasures of li fe. 
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Be always with people who inspire you;  
Surround yourself with people who lift you up.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Love is the silent conversation between two hearts.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Happy are those who are wise enough to seek c ontentment by cultivating true joy 
and peace in a simple environment.  
Paramahansa Yogananda  
 
Remember that not getting what you want is sometimes  
a wonderful stroke of luck.  
Dalai Lama  
 
Don’t let a little dispute injure a great friendship.  
Dalai Lama  
 
When  you realise that you’ve made a mistake,  
take immediate steps to correct it.  
Dalai Lama  
 
Remember that silence is often the best answer.  
Dalai Lama  
 
Live a good, honourable life.  Then when you get older and think back,  
you’ll be able to enjoy it a second time.  
Dalai Lama  
 
Remember that the best friendship is one in which your love for each other, 
exceeds your need for each other.  
Dalai Lama  
 
A man and a woman were walking along a beach  
where thousands of starfish had washed up.  
The woman kept bending down and throwing starfish back into the water.   
The man asked her, “Why do you bother throwing some back, there are thousands, 
what difference are you making.  
She bent down again and threw another into the water, replying, “It made a 
difference to that one.”   
Unknown  
 
"The doctor of the future will give no medicine, but will interest his patients in the 
care of the human frame, in diet, and in the cause and prevention of disease."  
Thomas Edison   
 
"Let thy food be thy medicine, and thy medicine be thy food."  
Hippocrates,  the Father of Modern Medicine   
 
"Most of the important things in the world have been accomplished by people  
who have kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all."  
Dale Carnegie   
 173 If there is light in the soul,  
There will be beauty in the  person,  
If there is beauty in the person,  
There will be harmony in the house.  
If there is harmony in the house,  
There will be order in the nation.  
If there is order in the nation,  
There will be peace in the world.  
Chinese Proverb  
 
Constant kindness can ac complish much.  
As the sun makes ice melt,  
kindness causes misunderstanding, mistrust, and hostility to evaporate.  
Albert Schweitzer  
 
The difference between  great people and everyone else  
is that great peop le create their lives actively,  
while everyone else is created by their lives,  
passively waiting to see where  life takes them next.  
The difference be tween the two is the difference  
between living fully and just existing.  
Michael E. Gerber  
 
Too often we unde restimate the power of a touch,  
a smile, a kind wo rd, a liste ning ear, an honest compliment,  
or the smallest act of caring,  
all of which have the potential to turn a life around.  
Leo Buscaglia  
 
If you don't follow through on your creative ideas,  
someone else will pick them up and use them.  
When you get an  idea of this sort, you  should jump in with both feet,  
not just stick your toe in the water...  
Be daring, be fearless,  
and don't be afraid that somebody is going to  criticise you or laugh at you.  
If your ego is not involved no one can hurt you.  
Guru R.H.H  
 
Nothing would be done at all  
if a man or woman waited  
until they could do it so well  
that no one could find fault with it.  
Cardinal Newman  
 
Things turn o ut best for the people who make  
the best out of the way things turn out  
Art Linkletter  
 
They may forge t what you said,  
but they will never forget how you made them feel.  
Carl W. Buechner  
 
 
 174 The quickest way to do many things is to do only one thing at once  
Samual Smiles  
 
Yesterday is history.  
Tomorrow is a mystery.  
And today?  
 Today is a gift.  
That's why  we call it The Present.  
Babatunde Olatunji  
 
An old m an was walking along the beach,  
when he came upon a part of the sand  
where thousands  of starfish had washed ashore.  
A little further down the beach he saw a young woman,  
who was picking up the starfish o ne at a time  
and to ssing them back into the ocean.  
"Oh you silly girl," he exclaimed.  
"You can't possi bly save all of these starfish. There's too many."  
The woman smiled and said, "I know. But I can save this one, "  
and she  tossed another into the ocean,  
"and this one", toss, "and this one..."  
'The Starfish' by Randy Poole  
 
Your vision will become clear  
only when you look into your heart.  
Who looks outside, dreams.  
Who looks inside, awakens.  
Carl Jung  
 
Visio n without action is a daydream.  
Action without v ision is a nightmare.  
Japanese Proverb  
 
Detachment is not indifference.  
It is the prerequisite for effective involvement.   
Often w hat we think is best for others  
is distorted by our attachments to our opinions.  
We want others to be happy in the way we thin k they should be happy.  
It is only whe n we want nothing for ourselves  
that we are able to see clearly into others needs  
and understand how to serve them.  
Mahatma Gandi  
 
There is no greater loan than sympathetic ear  
Frank Tyger  
 175 Chapter 10  
Appendices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The wind was against them now,  and Piglet's ears streamed behind him like banners  
as he fought his way along,  and it seemed hours before he got them into the shelter of the Hundred Acre Wood  
and they stood up straight again, to listen,  a little nervously to the roaring of the gail among the tree tops.  
"Supposing a tree fell down, Pooh, when we were underneath it?"  
"Supposing it didn't" said Pooh after careful thought!  
A.A Milne Winnie the Pooh  
 
 
 
 
 

 176 Toxins in your bathroom ? 
 
 
 
Nowadays it i s widely known that whatever is placed on the skin is readily absorbed and can enter the bloodstream 
and subsequently enter the body’s deepest tissues in a mater of seconds.  Although this is beyond dispute, 
manufacturers of cosmetic and bathroom products still allow potentially toxic substances to be included in their 
products; substances that are also used in the manufacturing industry with health warnings associated with them.  
Listed below are some of the ingredients to watch out for.  
 
Sodium Lauryl Sul phate (SLS):  One of the commonest foaming and bulking agents used in cosmetics.  It is also 
used as an engine de -greaser, garage floor cleaner and car wash detergent.  It readily penetrates the skin and can 
accumulate in our bodily tissues causing damage and irritation to the skin.  It also damages the immune system and 
can cause hair loss with long -term use.  It has been associated with the formation of cataracts, gum disease and 
mouth ulcers.  
Propylene Glycol:   A petrochemical solvent used in anti -f r ee z e , de-icer, paint, floor wax, brake and hydraulic fluid, 
pet food and many cosmetic and personal care products.  It is a humectant or moisture retainer and prevents things 
drying out.  It can make the skin feel smooth but beyond that it has no therapeutic b enefits.  It has been implicated 
with contact dermatitis, kidney damage and liver abnormalities.  It may cause skin rashes, gastro -intestinal 
disturbances, nausea, headaches, vomiting and central nervous system depression.  
Fluoride:   It is found in most to othpaste products and has been shown to be poisonous when ingested over long 
periods as it steadily accumulates in our tissues.  
Talc:   This is chemically similar to asbestos and is a known cancer causing substance.  It is used as a dry lubricant 
on surgica l gloves, condoms, personal -care powders and many cosmetics.  It clogs the pores and has been linked to 
post-operative peritonitis and fibrous adhesions.  
Formaldehyde:   Used as a preservative in many cosmetics.  It is known to cause eye, nose and throat in fections, 
coughing, asthma attacks, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, skin rashes, nose bleeds, headaches and dizziness.  
Diethanolamine (DEA), Monoethanolamine (MEA):  When found in products containing nitrites they can 
chemically convert to form nitr osamines which are potentially carcinogenic. They are also known to be skin and eye 
irritants.  They are readily absorbed through the skin and can accumulate in organs.  
Toluene:   A very common solvent found in nail enamels, hair spray, hair gel, perfumes a nd fragrances.  It triggers 
asthma attacks and can even cause asthma in previously healthy people.  It is a neurotoxin (adversely effects the 
nervous system) and can cause liver damage and hormonal imbalance.  
Aluminium:   A metal found in antiperspirants an d often suspected of being linked to Alzheimer’s disease.  As a 
neurotoxin it can actively interfere with brain functioning.  
Peg Laureth (ethoxylated):   This may contain dioxane which is an oestrogen mimic, endocrine disrupter and also 
potentially carcinog enic.  
 
Luckily there are natural, alternative sources of personal -care and cosmetic products available on the market. They 
can be obtained through companies such as Green People and Young Living (see ‘resources’ section).  
 177  Do suntan lotions really work?  
 
 
Recent scientific studies have revealed that sunscreen lotions may not offer protection from the type of sun damage 
that cause skin cancer. Unfortunately, these studies also suggest that sunscreen s may actually do more harm than 
good and that correct nutr ition and sensible exposure time may be all that is needed to stay safe. Sunscreen lotions 
may well be effective in protecting the skin from bad sunburn but there are other things going on below the surface 
of the skin that could create more serious proble ms in later years.   
 
Researchers at the UK's Restoration of Appearance and Function Trust found that free radical damage beneath the 
surface of the skin was reduced by approximately 50 percent in skin samples treated with sunscreen, compared to 
unprotecte d skin. While that may seem to be effective, researchers determined that the actual "free -radical protection 
factor" was only 2.  In other words, the sun protection factor of 20+ held true only with ultraviolet B (UVB) rays - 
the rays that cause sunburn. B ut protection from the free -radical damage that corrupts DNA and may prompt skin 
cancer was judged to be insufficient.   
 
Sunscreen use may well help prevent burning but because people feel safer they spend many extra hours in the sun 
and the additional ho urs of exposure may add up to cumulative DNA damage and skin cancer because a 
considerable amount of UVA rays are still getting through.   
 
It is important to remember the health benefits of adequate exposure to sunlight, especially in terms of the 
manufac ture of vitamin D. Those who live in extreme northern and southern latitudes are often vitamin D deficient 
because their exposure to sunlight is too low. A lack of vitamin D negatively impacts just about every system in the 
body so what we need is balance - the right amount of sun exposure with not too much, and not too little.  Sunlight 
is not just good for us, it's essential. But excessive exposure leads to sunburn, which is obviously not good for the 
skin. Nevertheless, sunburns do serve a purpose; they are nature's way of telling us that we're getting too much sun. 
When you start turning red, you're done - your body has had enough sunlight exposure.   
 
Proper nutrition also plays a key role in preventing skin damage. An adequate intake of Vitamins C and E are very 
important to relieving stress to the skin and reducing the risk of skin cancer. Folic acid is destroyed rapidly by heat, 
cold, and exposure to sunlight. In fact, it is sunlight's destructive effect on folic acid in the skin, not the actual sun 
exposure itself that accounts for a significant part of the skin cancer problem. The best dietary sources of folic acid 
include spinach and other dark green vegetables, brewers yeast, lima beans, cantaloupe, watermelon and liver from 
organically raised anim als.  
 
Sunbathing & Sunscreens  (excerpt from the Key to Health and Rejuvenation, www.authorhouse.com)  
...."The sun is completely harmless unless we expose our bodies to it for unduly long periods of time, especially 
between 10am and 3pm (during the summer) . Overexposure to sunlight makes most people feel very hot and 
bothered and burns their skin. To avoid being burnt and to find relief, our body’s natural instinct urges us to look for 
a shady place or to take a cold shower. Sunscreens, however, interfere w ith our natural response to sunlight.  
 
A British medical report, released in July 1996 and published as the lead article in the prestigious British Medical 
Journal, showed that the use of sunscreens might encourage skin cancer because they prompt people to  stay in the 
sun far too long. Their use can postpone the onset of sunburn by many hours. Most people think that this is 
advantageous whereas in fact it puts their lives at risk. The doctors who edited the report cited studies conducted in 
1995 in Western Europe and Scandinavia, which showed that frequent users of sunscreen lotion actually suffered 
disproportionately higher rates of skin cancer. The report says: “Sunscreens containing only ultraviolet B blocks 
protect against sunburn and therefore enable gr eater exposure to ultraviolet A (UVA) than would otherwise be 
possible to obtain.” In other words, many sunbathers expose themselves to much more UVA than they would if they 
didn’t use screens. Sunburn in fact is the body’s natural defence response against  more serious damage such as skin 
cancer.  
 178  
Without sunscreen your skin would begin to itch uncomfortably if it was exposed to too much sunlight. However, by 
using a sunscreen, you would not notice when your body has had enough of it because your first line  of defence -- 
sunburn -- has been crippled. This would lead to overexposure of UVA that together with other internal toxins might 
cause skin cancer. Under normal conditions (without sunscreen) you would never get too much UVA even if you 
were lying in the  sun for five hours. Instead, you would burn your skin heavily through overexposure to UVB.  
 
Although sunburn can impair immune functions and damage the skin, there is no proof that it can cause skin cancer. 
The above report stated that medical experts kn ow “little about the precise relation between sunburn and skin 
cancer.” This includes the fatal type of skin cancer, the malignant melanoma. Despite the enormous amount of 
research done on skin cancers, there has been no indication that malignant melanoma has any links with UV 
exposure. But what is known for sure is that sunscreen does not only fail to prevent skin cancer but on the contrary 
encourages it by amplifying UVA exposure. This makes sunscreens more dangerous than UV light could ever be.  
 
The que stion remains whether sunscreens that are made to block out both the UVA and UVB radiation could solve 
the problem? Research has shown that they don’t prevent skin cancer either. There are more people suffering from 
skin cancer today who have no or only ve ry little exposure to sunlight. Those who live mostly outdoors, at high 
altitudes, or near the equator, have the lowest incidence of skin cancers. But those who work under artificial lighting 
are the most susceptible.  
 
The average American, for example, s pends twenty -two hours a day indoors beneath and around artificial light. 
During the winter season most of the working population in the cities never even get to see the daylight, except 
through windows that reflect UV light. Incandescent light has a narro w band compared to sunlight and is known to 
weaken natural immunity (a Russian study showed that workers who are exposed to UV light during working hours 
suffer 50% fewer colds than those who are deprived do). A weak immune system cannot properly defend it self 
against disease, and that includes skin cancer!  
 
Researcher Dr. Helen Shaw and her research team conducted a melanoma study at the London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, and the Sydney Melanoma Clinic  at Sydney Hospital. They  found that offic e workers had 
twice the incidence of the deadly cancer as people who work outdoors. The results of the study were published in 
1982 by the British medical journal Lancet. Dr. Shaw proved that those who spend most of their time sunbathing 
have the lowest ri sk of developing skin cancer. By contrast, office workers who were exposed to fluorescent light 
during most of their working days had the highest risk of developing melanomas. She also discovered that 
fluorescent lights cause mutations in cultures of anima l cells.  
 
Dr. Shaw’s research lead to the conclusion that both in Australia and Great Britain, melanoma rates were high 
among professional and office workers, and low in people working outdoors. In other words, the Australians and 
British would be better off spending more time outside where there is plenty of UV light! Similar controlled studies 
were conducted at the New York University School of Medicine, which confirmed and substantiated Dr. Shaw’s 
research results."  
 179 Recommended reading  - Ayurveda  
 
 
General interest Ayurveda books (entry level)  
Perfect Health      Deepak Chopra  
Quantum Healing     Deepak Chopra  
Perfect Weight      Deepak Chopra  
The Wisdom of Healing     David Simon  
Mind, Body & Sport     John Douillard  
Yoga for your Type     David Frawley  
Prakruti     Robert Svoboda  
Ayurveda, the Science of Self -Healing   Vasant Lad  
The Physiology of Consciousness    Robert Keith Wallace  
Ayurvedic Beauty Care     Melanie Sachs  
A Woman’s Best Medicine     Nancy Lonsdorf  
Practical Ayurveda     A t r e y a  
Ayurvedic Healing  for Women    A t r e y a  
Perfect Balance      A t r e y a  
Ayurvedic books (beginner level)  
Secrets of Ayurvedic Massage    A t r e y a  
Yoga and Ayurveda     David Frawley  
Ayurvedic Massage     John Douillard  
Encyclopaedia of Ayurvedic massage   John Douillard  
Freedom from Dis ease    Hari Sharma  
Ayurveda (life, health & longevity)    Robert Svoboda  
Ayurveda for Women     Robert Svoboda  
Forever Healthy      Kumuda Reddy  
Ayurveda and Aromatherapy    Light Muller  
Ayurvedic Remedies     Light Miller  
Ayurvedic Home Remedies    Light Mille r 
Ayurvedic books (student level)  
The Ayurveda Encyclopaedia    Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha  
Yoga of herbs      Vasant Lad/ David Frawley  
Textbook of Ayurveda (Vol I & II)    Vasant Lad  
Ayurveda and the Mind     David Frawley  
Ayurvedic Healing     David Frawley  
Cont emporary Ayurveda     Hari Sharma  
Ayurveda and Panchakarma    Sunil Joshi  
Ayurvedic books (practitioner level)  
Ayurveda & Marma Therapy    David Frawley  
Ayurvedic Medicine     Sebastian Pole  
Secrets of the Pulse     Vacant Lad  
Secrets of Healing     Maya Tiwari  
Charaka Samhita  (three vol )    Sharma & Dash  
Sushruta Samhita  (three vol )    Murthy  
Astanga Hrdayam  (seven vol )    Murthy  
Sthapatya -veda books  
Vastu – the origin of Feng Shui    Marcus Schmieke  
The Vastu Vidya Handbook    Juliet Pegrum  
Astrology Books  
As trology of the Seers     David Frawley  
Ancient Hindu Astrology     James Braha  
 
 180 Recommended r eading - general  
 
 
 
Music for Healing Books  
Through Music to the Self     Peter Michael Hamel  
Healing Sounds      Jonathon Goldman  
The Mozart Effect     Don Campbell  
 
Fictional Books  
The Worm Forgives the Plough    John Collis  
The Glass Bead Game     Hermann Hesse  
Knulp       Hermann Hesse  
The Art of Motorcycle Maintenance    Robert Pirsig  
Lila      Robert Pirsig  
Bridge Across Forever     Richard Bach  
Illusions      Richard Ba ch 
Walden      Henry Thoreau  
The Snow Leopard     Peter Metthiason  
Touching the Void     Joe Simpson  
The Way of the Peaceful Warrior    Dan Macmillan  
The Celestine Prophecy     James Redfield  
Tai of Poo/Piglet      Benjamin Hoff  
 
Inspirational Books  
Men From Mar s Women from Venus    John Grey  
The White Hole In Time     Peter Russel  
Conversations With God     Neale Donald Walsh  
The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success    Deepak Chopra  
Autobiography of a Yogi     Yoganananda  
Bhagavad Gita      Maharishi  
Science of Being      Maharishi  
The Road Less Travelled     Scott Peck  
Writings of Florence Shovel Shinn    Florence Shovel Shinn  
 
Miscellaneous Books  
Essential Oils Integrated Medical Guide   Gary Young  
The Master Cleanser     Stanley Burroughs  
The Key to Health & Rejuvenation    Andrea Moritz  
The Amazing Liver Cleanse    Andrea Moritz  
Loving What Is      Byron Katie  
The Breakthrough Experience    John Demartini  
Tapping the Healer Within     Roger Callahan  
Yoga Nidra      Swami Satyananda Saraswati  
 
 
 
 
 
 181 Scientific references  
 
 
 
Schneider  R H, Cavanaug h K L, Kasture H S et al 1990  
Health promotion with a traditional s ystem of natural health care: Maharishi Ayur -Veda.  
Journal of Social Behaviour and Personality 5(3): 1 -27 
Psychological effects of PK – reductions in distress, anxiety, depres sion, fatigue, vigour.  
 
 
Sharma H M,  Nidich S, Sands D E 1993  
Improvement in cardiovascular risk factors through Pancha karma purification procedures.  
Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine 12 (4): 2 -13 
Lipid peroxide levels reduced significan tly three months after treatments . 
 
 
Waldschutz R  1988  
Influence of Maharishi Ayur -Veda purification treatments on physiological and psychological health.   
Erfahrungsheilkunde – Acta medica empirica 11: 720 -729 
Reduction in cholesterol and urea.  
Emotional  stability, psychological inhibition . 
 
 
Stryker T., and  Wallace, K  
Reduction in biological age through an Ayurvedic treatment program.  
Presented to the International congress of Psychosomatic Medicine, September 5, 1985, Chicago, Illinois.  
Morgan test – systolic blood pressure, hearing threshold, near -point vision.  
4.8 yrs reduction in biological age in only one week.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 182 Glossary  
 
 
Agni:   Digestive ‘fire’ – related to enzymatic action in the stomach, tissues and cells  
Ama:   Undigested food – sticky, white and toxic  
Asthi:  Bone tissue  
Basti:   Literally means ‘container’ - used for enema treatments  
Dhal:   Split yellow lentils made by de -husking and splitting Mung beans  
Doshas:   The energetic principles of Vata, Pitta & Kapha  
Ghee:   Clarified  butter – the milk solids and water are boiled away to leave pure milk fat  
Dashamula : A famous Ayurvedic herbal formula using ten roots and barks  
Dhatus:   The seven tissues of the body – lymph, blood, muscle, fat, bone, nerve, reproductive  
Kapha:   The ener getic principle of cohesion – made from the elements of water and earth  
Kichari:   A thick soup of basmati rice and split yellow lentils  
Mala:   Waste products  
Majja:   Bone marrow or nerve tissue  
Mamsa :  Musc le  t iss ue  
Matra basti:  A small, nourishing oil -based enema  
Meda:  Fat or adipose tissue  
Nasya:   Therapeutic cleansing of the sinus and nasal passages  
Niruha basti:  A cleansing and eliminating enema with a mixture of herbs and oil  
Panchakarma : The five (pancha) actions (karma) used to cleanse the body and restore balance to the doshas  
Prana:   The essential life -force of the body responsible for all movement and communication  
Peya:   A thin soup of rice water  
Pitta:   The energetic principle of heat and digestion – made from the elements of fire and water  
Purv akarma : Pre-treatment to main Panchakarma therapies using oil and ghee  
Prak ru ti:  Ayurvedic constitution ( vata, pitta, kapha  etc) 
Rakta :  Blood tissue  
Rasa:  Lymph tissue  
Rasayana:  Rejuvenative  
Snehana:  Oleation  
Shirovirechana : A purgative treatment for th e head, nose and sinuses  
Shrotas:   Channels of the body  
Shodhana:  Cleansing or eliminating  
Shukra : Reproductive tissue  
Svedana:  Sweating therapy  
Shamana:  Palliation therapy aimed at reducing symptoms  
Vamana : Therapeutic vomiting used to cleanse the upper b ody of ama and excess mucus  
Vata:   The energetic principle of movement and communication – composed of air and space  
Vilepi:   A thick porridge -type soup of rice, water and spices  
Virechana : Purgation therapy to reduce pitta and excess acidity in the body  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 183 Resources  
 
Meditation  & Jyotish  
Transcendental Meditation  Independent Transcendental Meditation teachers  www.tm -meditation.co.uk  
Maharishi TM Org anisation  Transcendental Meditation teachers in the UK  www.transcendental -meditation.co.uk  
Howard Beckman  Vedic astrology readings and Jyotish gem supplier  www.vedicworld.org  
Ayurvedic herbal products   
M AV Produ c ts (UK )  Ayurvedic herbs, teas, oils, books, music and skin -care produ cts  www.maharishi.co.uk  
Pukka Herbs  Ayurvedic herbs, teas and oils  www.pukkaherbs.com  
Essenti al Ayurveda  Ayurveda herbs & oils  www.essentialayurveda.co.uk  
Ayurveda Pura  Ayurvedic teas, herbs, oils & equipment  www.ayurvedapura.com  
Banyan Botanicals   ( US A)  Ayur veda herbs and oils.  www.banyanbotanicals.com  
Ayurveda Institute   ( US A)  Ayurveda herbs, oils &  books  www.ayurveda.com  
M AV Produ ct s ( US A)  Ayurvedic herbs, teas, oils, books, music and skin -care produ cts  www.mapi.co m 
Ayushakti (India)  Ayurveda herbs and oils  www.ayushakti.com  
 Ayurveda, Yoga & Panchakarma centres & practitioners (UK & Europe)  
The Vedic Retreat  Ayurveda detox , panchakarma and yoga retreat in Staffordshire  www .ayurveda.uk.com  
Maharishi Ayurveda Centre  Ayurveda therapies and Panchakarma detox in Lancashire  www.maharishi.co.uk  
Ayuseva  Ayurveda therapies and Panchakarma detox in Sussex (Brighton)  www.ayuseva.com  
The Tor Spa Retreat  Ayurvedic retreat and day spa in Kent  (Canterbury)  www.torsparetreat.com  
Ayush Wellness Spa  Ayurvedic retreat and day spa in the Channel Islands (Jersey)  www.ayushspa.com  
Ayurveda Retreat  Ayurvedic r etreat and day spa in London  www.ayurveda -retreat.co.uk  
Shymalaayurveda   Ayurvedic centre in London (Holland Park)  www.shymalaayurveda.com  
Ayurvedic Clinic  Ayurved a clinic in London (Wimbledon)  www.real -medicine.org  
The Ayurveda Clinic  Consultations and treatments (Dr Deepika Rodrigo ) in Brighton  www.theayurvedicclinic.com  
Lotus Ayurveda Spa  Ayurveda treatments and consultations in Leicestershire  www.lotus -ayurveda .co.uk  
Gardoussel  Ayurvedic and Yoga retreat in the south of France.  www. gardoussel.com  
Bad Ems  Maharishi Panchakarma & Ayurveda centre in Germany  www.ayurveda -germa ny.com  
Sharon Jackson  Ayurveda practitioner  in Nottingham  www.ayurvedalifestyle.co.uk  
Ayurveda, Yoga & Panchakarma Centres & practitioners (USA & India)  
Ayurvedic Life -spa Ayurveda centre in Colorado (USA)  www.lifespa.com  
The Ayurvedic Institute  Ayurveda centre in Albuquerque, New Mexico (USA)  www.ayurveda.com  
The Chopra Centre  Ayurveda centr e in California  www.chopra.com  
The Raj  Maharishi Ayurveda centre in Fairfield, Iowa (USA)  www.theraj.com  
Cameron Alborzian  Ayurveda therapies & Yoga Retreats  www.camerongoodhealth.com  
MAV  c linic  Maharishi Ayurveda cent re run by Dr Raju in Delhi (India)  www.drraju.com  
Ayushakti  Ayurveda centre run by Dr Pankaj Naran in Mumbai (India)  www.ayushakti.com  
Jiva Ayurveda centre run by Dr Partap Chauhan in Delhi (India)  www.jiva.com  
Vinayaka Ayurveda Foundation  Panchakarma cent re run by Dr Sunil Joshi in Nagpur (India)  www.vinayakayurveda.com  
Ananda  Ayurveda spa hotel in the Himalayas (India)  www.anandaspa.com  
Ayurveda study courses  
Ayurveda UK Academy  Ayurveda massa ge training (UK)  www.ayurveda training .com  
Ayurveda Pura Academy  Ayurveda massa ge training ( London ) www.ayurvedapura.com  
T ri Dosha  Ayurveda massage training (UK)  www.tri -dosha.co.uk  
Vedic Studies  Ayurvedic correspondence courses (UK & France)  www.atreya.com  
 184 Ayurveda Collage  Degrees & diplomas in Ayurveda at Middlesex University (UK)  www.ayurvedacollege.org.uk  
Ayurvedic Institute  Ayurveda training with Dr Vacant Lad in New Mexico (USA)  www.ayurveda.com  
Vedic Institute  Ayurveda correspondence courses (USA)  www.vedanet.com  
Academy of Vedic Studies  Ayurvedic training courses (Holland)  www.ayurvedicstudies.nl  
California Collage of Ayurveda  Ayurveda training courses (USA)  www.ayurvedacollege.com  
Ayurveda information directories  
MAV practitioners  Herbal product information for Ayurvedic practitioners                       maharishiayurvedapractitioners.co.uk  
Herbal Ayurveda  Herbal product information for Ayurvedic practitioners (Pole) www.herbalayurveda.com  
Ayurveda Practitioners Assoc.  Representing Ayurvedic practitioners in the UK  www.apa.uk.com  
Ne te ra Publishing  Information on Rasa Shastra and Jyotish by Andrew Mason  www.neterapublishing.com  
Vitamin, mineral & herb information   
Henrietta’s Herbal  Herbal reference directory  www.henriettesherbal.com  
Planetary Herbs  Herbal reference directory - Michael Tierra  www.pl anetherbs.com  
Herbal diary  Herbal reference & medical conditions directory  www.herbaldiary.org  
Herbs, spices, essential oils, super -foods & nutritional food supplements  
Baldwins  Western herb supplier  www.baldwins.c o.uk 
Neals Yard  Western herb supplier  www.nealsyardremedies.com  
Hydes Herbal Clinic  Western herb supplier and clinic  www.hydesherbalclinic.co.uk  
Halzephron Herb Farm  Western herb & natural food supplier  www. halzherb.com  
Pac ific  Botanic als  W es te rn  he rb  s upp l ie r (U SA )  www.pacificbotanicals.com  
 The Nutri centre   Herbs, vitamins, minerals and nutritional food supplements  www.nutricentre.com  
Savant   Nutritional food supplements, probiotics & super -foods  www.savant -health.com  
Young Living Oils  Essential oil supplier  www.youngliving.co.uk  
 
Cosmetics & toiletry  
Green People  Organic skin care, beauty products, toiletries & cosmetics    www.greenpeople.co.uk  
Spiezia  Organic skin care, beauty products, to ile tries  & cosme tics    www.spieziaorganics.com  
Organic Pharmacy  Organic skin care, beauty products, toiletries & cosmetics   www.theorganicpharmacy.com  
Organic Blu e Organic skin care, beauty products, toiletries & cosmetics   www.organicblue.co.uk  
Retreat centres, spas, therapists & workshops  
The Retreat Company   Directory of retreats, courses and therapy centres    www.th eretreatcompany.com  
Chanting Workshops  Mantric chanting and pranayama with Muz Murray  www.mantra -yoga.com  
Jem Friar  Personal detox coach in your own home  www.personaldetoxcoach.com  
Aghadoe Heights  Ayurveda Spa H otel in Killarney (Ireland)  www.aghadoeheights.com  
Spa Directory  Retreats, spas and practitioners nationwide  www.thespasdirectory.com  
Health directories  
Mercola  Health directory  www.mercola.com  
Cure Zone  Health directory  www.curezone.com  
Self  Grow th  Health directory  www.selfgrowth.com  
Chi s UK  Health directory  www.chisuk.org.uk  
Merck Manuals  Online medical library  www.merck.com  
 
 Ayurveda UK  
Danny Cavanagh & Carol Willis  
PO Box 5761, Burton -on-Trent, Staffordshire, United Kingdom, DE13 9YW  
Tel: +44 (0)1283 815 669 or 0870 744 1508   info@ayurveda.uk.com     www. ayurveda.uk.com  
  
 
                        
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayurveda UK  
Education Service  


